---
title: "Force majeure will always be present: Arkady Volozh's business principles"
description: On June 3, 2022, the European Union placed Yandex co-founder Arkady Volozh on the sanctions list. After that, Volozh left the post of CEO and the board of directors of the company. Recall that the entrepreneur spoke about the culture of experimentation and the “brain drain”
date: 2022-06-03T19:30:56+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-03T19:30:56+08:00
images:
- cRzS9Pe.jpg
caption: 'Arkady Volozh (Photo: Andrey Lyubimov / RBC)'
authors:
- Lina Byshok
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

Entrepreneur at heart
---------------------

Arkady Volozh considers himself not the best administrative leader and says that he is an entrepreneur at heart. He has long been immersed in the internal processes of Yandex, not to the extent that it looks from the outside, and he is happy about it. Doing administrative work, managing a large company and thinking about expanding the business at the same time is difficult. Volozh is more engaged in the search for new models of the company's development and "collects" people.

His life has never revolved around money. In his opinion, people have two types of activity: they produce an additional product and they produce love. An additional product changes something in external life - for example, when building roads, houses, screwing in light bulbs. And love can manifest itself in any form - in family, music or when writing a book. Despite the fact that these vectors are intertwined (the road also needs to be built with love), these are very different vectors. And for each person they are expressed in different proportions. In the Volozh family, according to him, he produces an additional product to a greater extent.

Failed experiments
------------------

In business, the founder of Yandex advocates competition and a level playing field. Only in competition can quality and development be ensured. Manufacturers should have equal access to the user, and all users should have freedom of choice.

Volozh actively supports the culture of experiments - small projects with a separate resource dedicated to them. Even despite the fact that most of these projects may be closed, and in general you will never guess what will fly and what will not. Each successful Yandex product is one successful experiment out of ten.

Work is not a hobby
-------------------

Volozh no longer refers to what he does as work in the usual sense of the word or as a hobby, this is a piece of life. In his opinion, work is what you do for a living, a hobby is for pleasure. And then there are things you just can't help but do. This is the job.

To keep leadership, it is necessary to work better, there are no other recipes. It is critical to improve something every day. The heads of large companies need to come to terms with the fact that the force majeure factor will always be present - companies will both rise and fall.

The director's task is not so much to invent new services, but to maintain the creative environment in which these services are born. Another director should help implement ideas.

Freedom and natural selection
-----------------------------

A good business can turn out in completely different people. To make it easy, you need to create an environment. And the role of the arbiter for entrepreneurs should be assumed by the state.

To make money in the market, technology alone is not enough. Need distribution and need access to the user. This is built either by the stunning success of an amazing app or through partnerships.

When developing a company, freedom is good, but it is only one of the components. Volozh gives a comparison with agriculture - you need to let the plants grow, but there must be natural selection. If something grows in the wrong direction, it is weeded out. If there is no business model or users for the service, it must feel it and cease to exist. Even if the service is wonderful and made "creatively", but there are no users - goodbye.

Amazing things that change the world are being invented all the time. But the first reaction of people to innovations is restrained - a mobile phone is heavy and expensive, the voice in Alice is clumsy, the drone travels, but not everywhere. However, then there comes a period when we stop noticing it - innovations become part of our lives, like a telephone. So it will be with drones. Progress will go deeper and cease to be noticeable.

Arkady Volozh is a co-founder and former CEO of the Yandex group of companies.

In 2021, he took 64th place in the ranking of the richest businessmen in Russia, according to Forbes. His fortune is estimated at $ 2.3 billion. In June 2022, Volozh was included in the EU sanctions list, after which he left the post of CEO of Yandex and resigned from the board of directors of the company.

Mathematics is everything
-------------------------

Often, knowledge of mathematics is more important than other skills. Mathematics is already becoming a part of everyday life.

Technology is not a miracle. Machine translation or a smart assistant is just the result of a combination of mathematical theorems and the work of engineers and programmers. To train really good engineers and programmers, you need a huge number of people with excellent mathematical education. In Russia, there is just a unique mathematical school, and specialists in working with large amounts of data and machine learning will definitely not have problems finding employment in the coming years. Brain drain is not shameful. Its only disadvantage is that no one pays for leaked brains.

Volozh believes that both in the country and in the company, it is necessary to support the creative environment. There is also a need for a system of recreating and training talents that would work at the school level. Still important are well-functioning processes for the production of a mass product and free channels of access to the user.

AI does not change a person
---------------------------

The founder of Yandex does not share the panic about the prevalence of artificial intelligence over humans. AI should be thought of in the same way that we once thought of steam engines and electricity. AI is another industrial revolution. It does not change the person himself, but takes on routine functions, like an excavator, which is better at digging than with a shovel.

Volozh considers it senseless to predict how human communication will change. And all the talk about the number of ecosystems or technologies that will exist in ten years is abstract. In a good way, nothing is clear. You have to be flexible. When there were only Rambler, Mail.ru and Yandex on the market, it seemed that everything was sorted out, everything was over. But then VKontakte, Taxi, Food, instant messengers appeared - a lot of things, and the whole life began. And it will still change.

_Sources: Vedomosti, Spletnik, Forbes, GQ, YouTube, Harvard Business Review_

**Author:** *Lina Byshok*