---
title: "What questions should applicants ask at the end of the interview?"
description: Do you have any questions? - a standard phrase that ends the interview. TopInterview experts tell you what to ask a potential employer to get the desired position
date: 2022-04-15T00:29:00+08:00
lastmod: 2022-04-15T00:29:00+08:00
images:
- BrbyUzk.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Marten Newhall/Pexels'
authors:
- topinterview
interest: self development
channel: 
- career
tags: 
- topinterview
---

You talked about yourself and your career, were able to answer all the tricky questions and make a good impression. Now the hiring manager (or recruiter) is asking if you have any questions. Many people forget about this interview point, but it is worth preparing well for it. A thoughtful, thoughtful question or even a few questions to the manager will help show your interest in the position and involvement in the conversation process. Below are five questions to help you complete your interview successfully.

“Could you entrust the management of the company to a hiring manager?”
----------------------------------------------------------------------

This provocative question is suitable if the interview is not conducted by your potential manager, but by an HR manager or someone else. This way you can better understand the culture of the company and get more information about the person who hires you. This is a good way to start talking about the benefits of different management styles and what qualities you value in your boss.

“Where is the person who worked in this position before now?”
-------------------------------------------------------------

According to one of the managers interviewed by TopInterview, this question helps to understand the potential trajectory of one's own development in the company. Finding out if your predecessor left for another organization for new opportunities, whether he was fired or promoted, you can better imagine your future in this company.

{{< ads >}}

This will let the hiring manager know that you want to learn more about the position and are ready to perform as well (and possibly better) than your predecessor. If it suddenly turns out that he was a terrible employee, it is worth asking what mistakes you should avoid if you take the position. In this way, you will once again demonstrate your desire to succeed in your new job.

“Are there any reasons why I am not suitable for this position?”
----------------------------------------------------------------

Openly asking for honest feedback will help you work on your shortcomings. You will show that you are trying to work on yourself, learn and improve. Also, in the future, it is worth considering this answer when preparing for interviews in other companies.

How long has this position been open?
-------------------------------------

Through this question, you will be able to determine how significant the role you are applying for is to the success of the company and how far the recruitment process has progressed.

HR specialist Palak Sharma notes that “if a job has been open for a year or more, then either no one in the company is particularly interested in finding an employee for this position, or the hiring manager is very picky.” It is also possible that the recruiter is constantly changing the requirements for the candidate and does not fully understand who he is looking for.

This question can also be used to gently move on to a discussion of the time frame within which you will receive feedback and your actions at the end of the interview. If the vacancy has appeared only a few days ago, then do not worry if you have to wait a little longer than usual: the hiring manager or recruiter will probably talk to other candidates as well.

"What exactly do you like about your job?"
------------------------------------------

Company culture is a key criterion when looking for a new job, along with salary. A manager's story about the merits of working in his company will help to learn more about its employees, values, and even some pleasant little things. Is your interlocutor satisfied with the relationship in the team? Or does he like a spacious office and a flexible schedule? Most likely, in response you will hear not empty formalities, but a personal opinion and information that is valuable to you about a potential job. You will get a clearer picture of the company and possibly establish a trusting relationship with the manager.

{{< ads >}}

At the same time, the hiring manager may not give a definite answer or give an answer that is too unconvincing for you. This is a bad signal: probably, not everything is in order in the team, or you risk not fitting into it.

Outcome
-------

By asking the right questions to the hiring manager and HR specialist, you will increase your chances of success during the interview. Use these tips as you prepare for your interview to come up with your own options. This is an opportunity to demonstrate your interest to a potential employer and to understand whether you really want to work in this company.