---
title: "“What salary do you expect?”: what to answer in an interview"
description: "Many people are afraid to talk about salary in an interview: too much will scare off the employer, and too modest may be less than what you could be offered. TopInterview experts explain how to deal with this tricky question"
date: 2022-05-24T00:23:00+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-24T00:23:00+08:00
images:
- xVWdavD.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- topinterview
interest: hr
channel: 
- career
tags: 
- topinterview
---

Be prepared that the hiring manager or recruiter will definitely ask you during the interview about what salary you expect. A potential employer needs to understand how your expectations match what he has to offer. The closer your amount is to what you are willing to pay, the higher the chances that you will receive an offer.

Do a little research
--------------------

Many companies choose not to list the salary in the job description, in which case you will have to do some groundwork. Look for information on salary levels according to your position, experience, education, and city. As a rule, data can be found on recruiting sites and resources with employee reviews about companies.

Do not forget that the geographical factor plays a big role. When trying to determine what reward you can count on, look for data for the city where the company is located. Salary information in what you think is a city hundreds of miles away is likely to be useless.

It is also necessary to take into account the professional experience and skills that you possess. The more experience you have, the larger amount you can name. It is worth paying attention to the social package, the possibility of compensation for transportation costs and other bonuses that the company can offer you.

Name a range, not a specific amount
-----------------------------------

What are the lower and upper limits of your salary expectations, based on the information that you could find. Your answer might sound like this:

{{< ads >}}

*   “According to the data that I was able to find, the average salary of a specialist with my experience and education in city N is approximately X to Y.”

This will give both you and the hiring manager room to maneuver, and the manager's reaction will tell you if your expectations match.

But remember that you should not discuss in detail the options during the interview. You can come back to this conversation later, while your goal is to get an offer with a decent salary close to what you want.

Option 2: Don't name specific numbers
-------------------------------------

You can always gently avoid answering this question if you don't feel confident:

*   "I will be happy to discuss this issue if I successfully pass all the stages of selection."
*   “I would like to know a little more about the requirements for an employee in this position first.”
*   “Now I would like to focus not on remuneration, but on what I can offer the company in this position. Since I don't have specific expectations at the moment, I look forward to hearing what the options are if we come back to this topic again in the next stages of the selection process."

Ask a question in response
--------------------------

Preparation for this question is really necessary: ​​if you have enough information, you can switch places with the hiring manager:

{{< ads >}}

*   “According to the information I was able to find, the average salary for position X in this region ranges from X to Y. Is this the same as the salary level in your company?”

If you didn't find anything or there is too little data, you can rephrase your answer a bit:

*   "Unfortunately, I don't know what the average salary is for this position in city N. Therefore, I would be happy if you could give me some guidance on the level of salaries in your company and, possibly, the availability of other bonuses for employees."
*   “To answer this question, I would like to ask a couple of clarifying questions about the responsibilities and requirements for an employee in this position.”

You need to ensure that your potential employer will give you an amount that you can target before you give an answer. This way you can play along with the hiring manager. If what you hear does not match your expectations, you can always discuss the possibility of a salary increase at the next stage.

What amount to indicate on recruiting sites
-------------------------------------------

Most experts advise not to enter anything in the “salary” column in your profile. If it is not possible to leave the field blank, enter zero or "XXX". On some sites, you can’t do this either: in this case, look again at the salary information in the region and indicate the upper limit of the salary range for this position. This is necessary so that you, not knowing about the level of salaries in the company, do not accidentally underestimate your expectations.