---
title: "How naps can help you be more alert and productive"
description: A short daytime sleep can have a positive effect on the body. At the same time, a long daytime sleep, on the contrary, is associated with an increased risk of disease and mortality. The best option is no more than 30 minutes. Much depends on time and goals
date: 2022-06-12T09:17:49+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T09:17:49+08:00
images:
- rwGIrkp.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Ng Han Guan / AP'
authors:
- reminder
interest: Health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- instructions
tags: 
---

How to sleep during the day: a technique
----------------------------------------

If you incorrectly calculate the duration of daytime sleep, then instead of increasing energy, you can get its decline for a while. This phenomenon is called sleep inertia. And unsystematic daytime sleep can disrupt nighttime sleep patterns and even increase the risk of death in the presence of chronic cardiovascular disease. Here's what to consider when drawing up your schedule.

**1\. The duration of daytime sleep**

Scientists from Flinders University in Australia have found that the duration of daytime sleep does not affect our cognitive abilities linearly, but depends on the phase of sleep in which we wake up. Here are a few sleep patterns that scientists have identified.

Short naps lasting five to 15 minutes improve our performance almost instantly, but the effect only lasts one to three hours.

During moderate sleep, between 15 and 45 minutes, the body has time to enter a phase of rapid eye movement, after which there may be a decrease in cognitive abilities, but the positive effect lasts for a long period of time.

The most useless can be called prolonged sleep from 45 to 90 minutes. During this time, the body enters a deep sleep phase. If you interrupt such a dream, then it will take about half an hour to recover. In addition, there are studies that claim that long daytime sleep can increase the risk of diseases, such as diabetes.

Long sleep, from one and a half to several hours, allows the body to go through all the stages of sleep that are necessary to get enough sleep. Its effect is comparable for us to a full night's sleep, but there are several unpleasant side effects. First, the long inertia of sleep, which can last up to half an hour. And secondly, the negative effect on nighttime sleep - it will be more difficult to fall asleep in the evening.

{{<ads>}}

According to NASA scientists, an ideal daytime nap lasts 26 minutes. The researchers came to this conclusion when they studied the work of pilots and found that those who slept that much after sleep showed a 54 percent increase in concentration and a 34 percent increase in productivity. You can try this option as a compromise between short sleep and medium-length sleep.

**2\. Time for naps**

Studies show that the best time for daytime sleep is between 12:00 and 16:00. This is usually the hottest time in the wild and the mammals go to daytime naps. Scientists recommend finishing sleep before 4:00 pm, because later naps can affect the quality of a night's sleep: the body simply does not have time to get tired enough.

The time of daytime sleep directly depends on the chronotype - the internal clock that makes some people “larks” and others “owls”. The first should go to bed earlier - from 13:00 to 13:30, the second - from 14:30 to 15:00. Due to regular afternoon meetings, I don’t manage to get into the ideal slots, so I go to bed a little later - at 14:00.

There are days when the time of daytime sleep can be shifted by half an hour or an hour due to a prolonged work meeting or other tasks. So that this does not happen too often and does not break the sleep schedule, it is important not only to determine the time of daytime sleep that is comfortable for you, but to agree on it with your family: tell why this is so important, and warn you at what time you should not be disturbed. A calendar with booked sleep slots can help resolve this issue with colleagues. It is open to colleagues and everyone can see when you are sleeping. This does not always save - sometimes a conflict arises. If a meeting with a large number of participants is scheduled at this time, then I can move the lunch siesta.

Four rules for daytime sleep
----------------------------

1.  Lower the temperature. Every time before going to bed, I curtain the windows, ventilate and cool the room. Here, the same recommendations apply as for a night's sleep: lower temperature, humidity and fresh air help you fall asleep faster and not wake up.
2.  Isolate yourself from noise. I use the simplest silicone earplugs, they are not inserted deep into the ears, they cannot damage anything, they are easy to wash, which means to achieve greater hygiene and not bring an infection into the ear canal.
3.  Come up with a ritual. The ritual helps to calm thoughts and turn off even in a noisy bright room.
4.  Limit sleep time. You can adjust the sleep time using a timer, any alarm clock or Insight Timer meditation app is suitable for this (it can be heard even through a nap and earplugs). But the body quickly gets used to the set time, and the timer becomes only a safety net: you yourself will wake up without any problems a couple of seconds before its signal.

But you can take it one step further and try to get even more out of your sleep.

{{<ads>}}

**Oura Ring** . To check what exactly and how affects the quality of your sleep, measurements are needed. Modern fitness bracelets can do this (our experts recommend the Garmin Vivosmart 4), but the most convenient option is the Oura Ring, which determines the length of different sleep phases and body temperature. It also measures sleep-related heart rate variability (HRV), the change in the time interval between heartbeats. HRV reflects the level of stress: in an excited state, the heart beats more rhythmically. The higher the HRV value, the better. A low value can signal, for example, that you haven’t recovered enough from yesterday’s workout and you should skip the gym that day.

Such devices help not only to decide whether to give an additional load to a poorly-sleeping body, but, like any biofeedback tool, they allow a more objective assessment of changes in behavior: for example, after seeing a sharp deterioration in sleep after drinking alcohol in the evening on the Oura people seriously think about quitting drinking (and quit).

**Light Therapy, Joovv** . This topic is promoted by biohacker, writer and founder of Bulletproof David Asprey. It is based on the idea of ​​fighting "garbage" light (junk light, by analogy with junk food) - this is all artificial light, including radiation from phone screens and monitors. It is countered by the warm infrared radiation provided by devices like the Joovv, from large human-high panels to portable units the size of iPads. Esprey, a huge Oura fan, claims that the quality of his sleep has improved significantly thanks to Joovv.

**Wave impacts** . Depending on the type of brain activity, the signal from neuron to neuron is transmitted at different frequencies. Creative thinking corresponds to low frequencies from 4 to 8 Hz - the so-called theta waves. Alpha waves - from 8 to 12 Hz - correspond to a calm, focused state. Beta waves - 12-30 Hz - appear, for example, when a person is thinking hard about a task, and even higher frequencies - gamma waves - correspond to an excited state, anxiety, empathy. At these frequencies, different areas of the brain are involved in the work, which communicate with each other. Gamma waves can be observed, for example, when performing complex coordination movements or when solving problems that require intensive reproduction of past experience.

During sleep, our brain also works, and the frequency of signals is curled by the phase of sleep:

*   NREM 1 - sleep stage: theta waves, easy to wake up;
*   NREM 2 - in this state it is easy to wake a person, he has dreams, brain activity increases, the border of alpha and beta waves;
*   NREM 3–4 are delta waves. The body is practically motionless, there are no dreams, it is hard to wake up. At this stage, regenerative processes are launched, the peak of the activity of the immune system;
*   REM - stage of fast sleep; you can see dreams; predominantly alpha and beta waves. At this stage of sleep, neuronal regeneration occurs; this stage is important for the control of nervous processes.

Accordingly, if during the day you need a creative idea, then you need to get into the NREM 1 phase (a few minutes of sleep, nap) - it will give an incentive to theta waves.

{{<ads>}}

In recent years, quite a lot of experiments have been carried out in which a sleeping person is affected by electromagnetic waves and sound. Research shows that waves emitted from the outside, which coincide in frequency with those created by the brain during deep sleep, enhance their action and "help" sleep. Mikhail Poluektov, Associate Professor, Department of Nervous Diseases and Neurosurgery, First Moscow State Medical University. I.M. Sechenova, head of the department of sleep medicine, recalls that electrical stimulation devices, for example, the Electrosleep device, have been used in Russian sanatoriums since the times of the USSR. He adds, however, “The long-term effects of such stimulation are unknown, and there are no studies that show that the sleep of people in the control group was worse than the sleep of people who were stimulated with Electrosleep.

Continuing the theme of the impact on a person during sleep, Walker writes in his book that transcranial electrical stimulation also helps the formation of memory and the learning process. Sound stimulation can have a similar effect. Quiet acoustic signals, similar to the sound of a metronome, are maximally synchronized with the brain waves of a sleeping person, thereby contributing to an even deeper sleep.

Check rhythms. To optimize your sleep pattern, you should study how your circadian rhythms work for you. How can I do that? Genetic research companies like 23andMe are linking your sleep habits to your genes. They take from scientific research those genes that have an impact on sleep, and then conduct surveys of tens of thousands of their customers about their habits. By comparing these data, it is possible to predict, for example, the time most suitable for waking up.

There are also deeper studies that are not yet available to consumers. For example, based on data on the composition of RNA in the blood, scientists have learned to predict the activity of the production of various proteins, and hence the activity of various processes occurring in the body, including circadian rhythms. For an accurate forecast, you need to take a blood test several times a day, which is not very convenient.

**Modern recommendations for daytime sleep**
--------------------------------------------

*   A short nap (no more than 30 minutes) will help you focus and not feel tired for the rest of the day.
*   If you are tired, then sometimes you can sleep longer, but you need to give the body the opportunity to sleep through the full cycle, that is, wake up during the first REM phase (sleep for about 90 minutes).
*   In any case, you should not sleep after 16:00 - otherwise it will lead to problems with sleep at night.
