---
title: "How to set up a healthy sleep: 33 tips for a better night's rest"
description: Sleep accounts for a third of our lives, yet we pay much less attention to sleep than to wakefulness. And even less often - we think about how to spend the time allotted for sleep with maximum benefit. How to develop a rational attitude to sleep?
date: 2022-06-11T13:25:45+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T13:25:45+08:00
images:
- Y7sKmLo.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- reminder
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- instructions
tags: 
---

Healthy sleep rules
-------------------

All ways to influence the quality of sleep can be divided into four categories:

*   everything related to the regime and cyclicity;
*   whatever you take in;
*   everything that happens in the bedroom;
*   everything that goes on in your head.

**Mode and cyclicity**

Our body is not very well adapted to sudden shifts in sleep patterns. No wonder the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the research arm of the US Department of Health, puts regular sleep at the top of its list of recommendations. One of the most prominent advocates of quality sleep, professor of neurology and psychiatry at the University of California at Berkeley, Matthew Walker writes about the same in the book Why We Sleep: “Go to bed and get up every day at a certain time. Being a slave to habit, a person has difficulty adjusting to changes in his own sleep pattern. Sleeping longer on weekends does not fully compensate for the lack of sleep during the week, while waking up early on Monday mornings will be more difficult.

{{<info>}}
1\. Always get up at the same time. Even on weekends.

2\. Set an alarm for the time when it's time to go to bed.

3\. You can even put sleep on your calendar. This is no less important than breakfast, sports or a meeting.
{{</info>}}

The body begins to prepare for a night's sleep even the previous day and even in the morning: the more light we receive during daylight hours, the better the quality of sleep - light, among other things, allows you to start the production of substances - precursors of melatonin.

We usually spend a lot of time in offices, but we must understand that office lighting cannot be compared with sunlight: even the brightest lamps are 100 times weaker than sunlight on the street in clear weather, and ten times in cloudy weather.

{{<info>}}
4\. Be outdoors for at least 30 minutes during the day.

5\. Pick up a workplace by the window.

6\. In northern winters, you can use compact blue light fixtures such as the Philips EnergyUp.
{{</info>}}

The use of bright screens before bed can affect the quality of sleep: people who read an iPad for an hour before bedtime peak melatonin release later than those who spent time with a paper book, and the total amount of melatonin decreases. This can cause sleep to be more shallow and possibly shorter.

{{<ads>}}

{{<info>}}
7\. Set your phone and tablet so that two hours before bedtime, the screen light changes to a soft yellow, which does not affect the production of melatonin as much. It is also important to lower the screen brightness. But it is best not to use mobile devices in the evening.

8\. Install the free f.lux application on your computer, which gives a soft yellow light in the evening.

9\. Try blue light glasses, use them one and a half to two hours before bedtime. Eyewear examples: Uvex Skyper sports glasses, Gunnar Intercept gamer glasses, Swanwick brand products.

10\. An hour and a half before bedtime, dim the lights in the room. It is noteworthy that a modern person, right before going to bed, necessarily spends time in a room with the brightest possible light - in the bathroom. Try installing dimmed lights in your bathroom, use incandescent bulbs instead of LED bulbs, or even candles.

11\. Get complete darkness in the bedroom. Make custom blackout curtains or roller blinds.

12\. Use a comfortable mask that closes your eyes when you have to sleep in a room that is not completely dark. Bestselling author Tim Ferriss recommends the Sleep Master - these masks have a really comfortable fit that wraps around your entire head. Another brand with dozens of design options is Dream Essentials.

13\. Use in winter to wake up lamps that simulate dawn, for example from the same Philips (Somneo Sleep & Wake-up Light HF3650, sold in Russia).

14\. Provide as much light as possible in the morning - better than sunlight (open the curtains immediately). In this way, you will most effectively start a new 24-hour cycle.
{{</info>}}

The final piece of advice regarding regulating your sleep-wake cycle may not be to everyone's liking. For a person involved in the life of a big city, it will be the most difficult to fulfill.

In his book, Stevenson writes that choosing a time to sleep is “like setting an hour for stock investments: it doesn’t matter how much you put in, it matters when.” Now, this moment - Stevenson calls it "profitable time" - falls between ten o'clock in the evening and two in the morning. It is during these hours that the restoration of the body and the production of hormones are most active, the author writes. Perhaps this is due to the fact that for millions of years throughout evolution and up to the onset of the industrial age, people and their ancestors went to bed at sunset - and the time we call midnight really fell in the middle of sleep.

{{<ads>}}

{{<info>}}
15\. Set aside as much sleep as possible between 22:00 and 2:00.
{{</info>}}

According to modern recommendations, the length of sleep for an adult should be seven to nine hours.

**Everything you take in**

The two most common stimulants that interfere with sleep are caffeine and alcohol.

Once in the body, caffeine begins to act after 30 minutes (which is why people sometimes practice caffeinated daytime sleep - fall asleep immediately after a cup of espresso, setting a timer for 20 minutes). Caffeine is excreted from the body rather slowly: its half-life is from four and a half to seven hours. This means that 50% of the caffeine in your 7:00 pm cup of coffee will still be in your system by midnight. “Sleep will not come easily and will not be restful as long as your brain continues to fight the opposing power of caffeine,” Walker writes in his book.

{{<info>}}
16\. Eliminate drinks and foods containing caffeine (coffee, cola, black and green tea, chocolate) in the afternoon. Remember that "decaffeinated coffee" (decaf) is not completely stimulant-free and can contain 15% or more of the dose of a regular drink.
{{</info>}}

Alcohol is one of the sedatives: it binds to brain receptors, suppressing the excitation of electrical impulses in neurons. “Alcohol wakes you up, but it doesn't bring natural sleep. The impulses that the brain generates under the influence of alcohol differ from the waves of natural sleep and are more similar to the impulses that occur during light anesthesia, ”Walker recalls in his book.

If you're nervous, alcohol may help you fall asleep, but it won't affect your sleep in the best way.

Alcohol makes sleep fragmentary, with frequent awakenings (at the same time, a person may not notice them, but in the morning feel overwhelmed).

Alcohol is one of the most powerful REM suppressors. Ethyl alcohol is converted into acetaldehyde in the body, which blocks the brain's ability to generate REM sleep, Walker writes.

{{<info>}}
17\. Eliminate alcohol in the evening, in general, reduce its consumption. Paradoxical advice: if you drink on an empty stomach, then the absorption and metabolism of alcohol are faster (this also applies to coffee) and the negative effect may have time to disappear by night. However, this practice can lead to other, more undesirable consequences.
{{</info>}}

The amount and composition of food taken during the day can affect the quality of sleep. But food is too broad a topic, affecting many other body systems that can indirectly affect sleep. In addition, large-scale studies have not shown a consistent relationship between certain types of diet and sleep quality. A high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet for two days is known to reduce the amount of deep sleep at night. A four-day diet high in sugar and other carbohydrates but low in fiber combination resulted in less deep slow wave sleep and more frequent nighttime awakenings.

{{<info>}}
18\. Avoid large meals and large amounts of liquid late in the evening. You can have a light snack, but a heavy dinner can cause indigestion that will interfere with normal sleep.

19\. Avoid diets high in carbohydrates, especially sugar.
{{</info>}}

Finally, people take medications and supplements to help them fall asleep or to improve the quality of their sleep. The effects of commercially available sleeping pills sometimes do not differ much from placebo, do not create the desired quality of sleep, as measured by measurements of electrical discharges in the brain, and there is even a study according to which people who take prescription sleeping pills die 4.6 times more often.

{{<info>}}
20\. Do not use sleeping pills.

21\. Experiment with supplements.

22\. Don't overuse melatonin except in special situations like long flights and jet lag caused by jet lag. Melatonin can also help older people whose production of this hormone stops.
{{</info>}}

**Everything that happens in the bedroom**

**Temperature.** It is believed that the ideal indoor temperature for sleep is 18-22 degrees. The circadian rhythms that sleep adjusts to, among other things, regulate body temperature. By night, it drops and reaches a minimum around four in the morning.

Accordingly, cooling the body can help you go to sleep. Tim Ferris, who suffered from insomnia for many years, takes an ice bath in the evenings. But, oddly enough, it makes sense to take a hot bath - firstly, it helps to relax, and secondly, when you go out, the water evaporating from the surface of the body cools it.

Physical activity raises the temperature - this is one of the reasons why you should not load yourself right before bed (you need at least a two-hour pause).

You can use cooling mattress pads, such as ChillyPad. They allow you to regulate the temperature and are convenient if you sleep together, as they can only cover half of the bed and allow you to compensate for the heat (which is 34-37 degrees) coming from your partner.

{{<ads>}}

**Air.** Other parameters that affect sleep are the content of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the room, the purity of the air and humidity. In the cold season, in rooms with central heating, air humidity drops to 15% or less. If the room is not ventilated, then the level of carbon dioxide can be five times higher than in a room with free flow of fresh air.

In urban conditions, the optimal solution is complex devices that purify and humidify the air, saturate it with ions. Among other things, maintaining air humidity at 40-55% will protect your mucous membranes from drying out and protect you from infections.

**Before bedtime.** The body is not ready to instantly switch from activity to sleep - a transitional period is needed during which you tune in to rest. Doctors and sleep researchers advise switching to any quiet activity - reading a book (preferably paper), journaling, talking, light music, meditation, yoga, audio books - fiction is better, as the stories they tell captivate and switch your brain.

Relaxation exercises also help. Tim Ferriss carries a whole set of devices with him: Rumbler Rollers for foot massage, RAD massager for relaxing back muscles, inflatable rubber ball for massaging abdominal muscles. Ferris also uses the Apnea diver app to do some breathing exercises to help him relax.

You can relax the muscles of the whole body with the help of standard stretching exercises, in addition to this, you can do an exercise to relax the muscles of the face and tongue.

It is also worth choosing the right mattress and pillows for sleeping. The mattress should be of medium firmness, only the head should lie on the pillow, not the shoulder. It is better to choose by enumeration what suits you best, not paying attention to the advertising claims of manufacturers.

{{<info>}}
23\. Buy a humidifier and air purifier.

24\. You can cool off with a hot bath.

25\. Adjust the temperature in the bedroom at 18-22 degrees.

26\. Buy massagers for muscle relaxation.

27\. Set aside an hour and a half before bed for quiet activities, excluding TV. To make these activities permanent is to develop a habit.
{{</info>}}

**Everything that goes on in my head**

The speed of falling asleep, the depth of sleep directly depend on your mental state (and this includes the balance of hormones): often, in order to overcome insomnia or improve sleep, you need to figure out what is in your head.

One way to get rid of disturbing thoughts that keep you awake is offloading, unloading them somewhere. If you are not left with restless thoughts about the events of tomorrow, then you can write down a clear plan of action for tomorrow on paper. There is some evidence that you can “crowd out” annoying thoughts by deliberately loading your brain with a simple computer game like Tetris or Candy Crush Saga. The latter is sometimes used in the evenings by Jane McGonigal, author of Reality in Question.

Meditation helps to relax, reduce stress and switch to sleep, especially related to body scanning: attention, moving from the bottom up from the legs to the head, is fixed on sensations in different zones. Apps like Calm have short meditation programs specifically designed for falling asleep. Renowned biohacker and radical life extension enthusiast David Asprey's company Bulletproof recommends their 20-minute meditation.

One of the tips of psychologists is to fix in the mind that the bed is a place to sleep, and not to eat, work or watch TV.

{{<ads>}}

The approach to the fight against insomnia from the standpoint of psychology has been gaining momentum in recent years. The most effective method is cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia, or CBT-I. In 2016, the American College of Physicians even issued an official opinion: it is CBT-I, and not sleeping pills, that should be used as the first line therapy for people with chronic insomnia. What are these techniques? Patients are instructed to reduce caffeine and alcohol intake, remove electronic display devices from the bedroom, and keep the room temperature cool. In addition, the patient must establish a sleep and awakening regimen, observing it even on weekends. Further, changes in the quality of sleep that occurred due to behavioral changes are recorded.

Another rule of CBT-I is not to lie in bed awake: it is better to get up and do something calm and relaxing until the desire to sleep returns. Why does it work? Let's say you wake up at night and are unable to sleep. Perhaps this was due to the fact that there was a release of cortisol, the stress hormone. But if you continue to lie in bed and think that now you won’t get enough sleep and the whole day will go down the drain, then you will start a new cycle of cortisol release, which will delay falling asleep even more. It’s better to say to yourself: “Okay, I woke up, and I have time to read a book or work a little” - this will warn you against a second wave of stress hormone release and allow you to return to bed after a while.

{{<info>}}
28\. If rumination, disturbing thoughts prevent you from falling asleep, write them down in as much detail as possible in your diary (offloading).

29\. Ten minutes of playing Tetris or Candy Crush Saga can unburden the brain by replacing repetitive thoughts with powerful visuals.

30\. Do not lie in bed for more than 20 minutes without sleep. Growing anxiety about not being able to sleep (again) triggers a second wave of stress and delays sleep even further.

31\. Sex is the perfect sleeping pill.

32\. Don't exercise less than two hours before bedtime.

33\. Do not resort to vigorous physical activity if you have not had enough sleep for several days.
{{</info>}}

Sleep hygiene, which is set by the 33 rules described above, will lead to more return on time spent in bed: following these recommendations, you are likely to sleep soundly and recover better.