---
title: "Why do we sleep and how to sleep properly"
description: Sleep is such an inevitable state that it is almost impossible to lose it, somnologist Mikhail Poluektov is sure. He told what is the minimum time you need to spend on sleep, how rituals help you fall asleep and whether you can trust the data of fitness trackers
date: 2022-06-11T09:21:12+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T09:21:12+08:00
images:
- mC2Qtbl.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Otsphoto / Shutterstock'
authors:
- reminder
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- instructions
tags: 
---

{{<info>}}
Mikhail Poluektov is one of the best sleep researchers in Russia. He is an associate professor of the Department of Nervous Diseases and Neurosurgery of the First Moscow State Medical University. THEM. Sechenov and Head of the Department of Sleep Medicine at the University Hospital.
{{</info>}}

Basic functions of sleep
------------------------

The most popular theory now that explains such an absolute need for sleep every day in all actually living beings, including very simple ones, is the so-called **theory of synaptic homeostasis** . It postulates that our neurons, while we receive information, all the time form new and new connections. And if there was no state that would allow removing unnecessary connections, then neurons would acquire more and more of these connections and eventually lose the ability to provide them.

In order to provide communication between neurons, it is necessary that electrical impulses flow through them, and for this the cell must generate energy. It can generate energy for 100 synapses, for several thousand synapses, but for 100 million it cannot. And therefore, some kind of state is needed in which these “information flows” are redistributed, when the brain evaluates which connections are more important, which are not needed - for example, which have not been used for ten years. During sleep, there is a process of cleaning up extra connections so that the neuron is updated and with about the same number of these important connections that it should provide.

In fact, many different functions are attributed to sleep: protective, restorative, there is a function associated with the phenomenon of cleansing the body or brain. During sleep, there are also processes of normalization of the cardiovascular system. Of course, the state of sleep is necessary not only for the brain, but also for the restoration of other body systems. But, most likely, this imperativeness of sleep is still due to the special role it plays in restoring the central nervous system.

{{<info>}}
while we sleep
--------------

1.  Sleep is very closely related to circadian rhythms: they regulate biological processes in the body and correspond to the change of time of day. This rhythm is endogenous, that is, it is “wired” in the very work of the body and is noticeable even at the level of individual cells. What follows from this? You need to sleep at the moment when the body “expects” sleep and is ready to launch all the necessary mechanisms.
2.  During sleep, the process of transferring memory from temporary storage (the hippocampus) to the cerebral cortex occurs. Sleep in general helps our brain improve our ability to learn, remember, reason and make choices.
3.  The brain is also cleared of toxic products of oxidative processes. Throughout the rest of the body, the lymphatic system plays the role of a sewer. It does not reach the brain, so another system called glymphatic performs the same function here: during deep sleep, brain tissues are nourished and cleansed by washing with cerebrospinal fluid.
4.  Sleep replenishes the arsenal of the immune system, helping to fight off infections.
5.  Sound sleep promotes hematopoiesis and counteracts the development of atherosclerosis.
6.  During sleep, there is a peak in the secretion of growth hormone.
7.  Sleep affects metabolism by regulating the balance of insulin and circulating glucose in the blood.
8.  Sleep also regulates appetite by reducing impulse cravings, helping you make healthy food choices and control your body weight.
9.  Adequate sleep supports a healthy intestinal microflora.
10.  The state of the cardiovascular system also depends on proper sleep: it lowers blood pressure and keeps the heart in excellent condition.
11.  Sleep also acts as free psychotherapy. During the REM phase, the brain “lives through” disturbing and tragic events from the past against the backdrop of reduced levels of the stress hormone norepinephrine, which allows emotional wounds to heal. That is why we remember events from childhood that once seemed scary, without any anxiety at all: we managed to scroll through them dozens of times in a calm sleep mode.
{{<info>}}

How to determine the quality of sleep
-------------------------------------

In the first place is a subjective feeling: how satisfied a person is with sleep, whether he feels its depth, whether he feels a feeling of morning freshness, sleepiness in the morning. Why is this in the first place? Because the main purpose of sleep is to restore the functions of the central nervous system. And this recovery, of course, affects the well-being of a person and his cognitive abilities.

There is, of course, the hidden part of the healthy sleep iceberg. We can do a study of a person who is satisfied with his sleep and see that he is not so good, that he may not have enough deep stages of sleep, that he makes up for the lack of deep stages of sleep due to the lengthened sleep time. Or more often it happens the other way around: a person finds himself in conditions that place increased demands on him, sleep time is reduced, but sleep becomes denser, more concentrated, it has more deep stages. And indeed, he is satisfied with his sleep, although when we do research and objectively look at the picture of sleep, we see that there is not enough sleep time, the amount of sleep with dreams is reduced, but he has an increased amount of deep sleep, due to this he restores himself better.

There is a gold standard for sleep research - a polysomnographic study, when a patient comes to the sleep laboratory, he is placed in a separate room, a bunch of sensors are placed on him that record various indicators of the body's activity, primarily an electroencephalogram, muscle tension, cardiac activity, breathing. And then we see all these curves on the computer screen and we can actually say with absolute certainty whether a person was sleeping, not sleeping, and the computer calculates the amount of sleep for us, the amount of deep, slow sleep, individual stages.

There are simpler devices. Actigraphs are sensors similar to current fitness trackers, in which there is an accelerometer inside, they respond to the number of movements. Such actigraphs went through the validation process, and it turned out that they determine sleep indicators relatively well: sensitivity is about 90%, specificity is 60–70%, that is, not bad in principle. True, these actigraphs are expensive - 250 thousand rubles.

Fitness trackers are based on the same principle: the same accelerometer is installed, and a computer program determines that a certain level of physical activity corresponds to sleep, a certain level to wakefulness. When it comes to total sleep time, fitness trackers are pretty much telling the truth. But they absolutely incorrectly show the time of wakefulness at night, the number of awakenings at night, about deep and superficial sleep. But, despite the low accuracy, the advantage of a fitness tracker is that it forces a person to take care of their health, in this case, monitor the regimen, monitor the state of sleep, that is, it simply begins to pay more attention to these issues.

How much sleep do you need
--------------------------

To begin with, it is worth understanding why people are concerned about the issue of sleep duration. There are usually two reasons: someone fears that they sleep too much or too little, and another part of the people believe that sleep is wasted time and that it would be good to learn how to sleep less, but more efficiently.

Sleeping too much or too little is really bad. Regular sleep of less than six to seven hours increases the risk of obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. A large review of scientific papers shows that lack of and excess sleep (less than seven hours, more than nine hours) are associated with increased mortality. The publication is talking about correlation, not causation: apparently, short sleep worsens health, but short and too long sleep can also be the result of some other diseases. A person sleeps poorly or too much, because he is ill with something, and this disease, and not sleep, leads to premature death.

If we talk about the recommendations of international experts, then four years ago it was agreed that the norm of healthy sleep is considered to be from seven to nine hours, with the exception of people in special conditions who need more sleep, and six hours is acceptable for the elderly .

But it should be mentioned that there are two durations of sleep: sleep for life and sleep for a good life. I really like to give an example about the OSTAR transatlantic races, this is when yachtsmen cross the Atlantic Ocean alone. All participants were extremely motivated and used various technological innovations, and, of course, they were interested in sleeping as little as possible in order to spend more time at the helm. And when scientists got involved in studying the duration of sleep of these yachtsmen, it turned out that none of them went beyond the duration of sleep in the region of five hours. That is, no matter how hard they tried, but for a long time such intense boating could not do with less than five hours of sleep.

Most likely, this is the so-called nuclear sleep - sleep, which is necessary to ensure the most important, urgent needs of the body, everything else is not so critical. Yes, of course, a person who sleeps for five hours is not so smart, he does not react to danger in the same way, but all his systems work, function, and can do this for quite a long time. Life requires at least five hours of sleep, and for a good life - from seven to nine hours. 

Limiting sleep time is bad. For example, reducing sleep time to five hours or less leads to an increase in cases of arterial hypertension. It has also been shown that a reduction in sleep time is accompanied by a violation of carbohydrate metabolism, an increased risk of developing diabetes mellitus.

How do you know how much sleep you need?
----------------------------------------

It is better to determine your rate during a period when there are no excessive loads, for example, on vacation. For the second or third week, you can experiment: go to bed at the same time, for example at 11 pm, and wake up as it will. The body itself will tell you what time it takes for the final restoration of all functions. Usually this time is about eight hours. In other words, you can test your individual sleep rate by moving yourself into a natural state, when you are not dominated by social circumstances and you are ready to go to bed soon after dark.  

Individual sleep needs can vary greatly. For example, there are carriers of a certain mutation of the Dec2 gene, which regulates the production of the orexin peptide, which maintains wakefulness. This small group of people produce increased amounts of orexin, which allows them to stay awake longer and get six hours of sleep or less.

{{<info>}}
Is it possible to sleep in reserve?
-----------------------------------

You can stock up on sleep for a while. There is even such a term banking sleep. When two groups of healthy volunteers were taken, one of the groups was forced to sleep two hours more during the week, to stock up on sleep. And the other group slept, as usual, for example, seven hours. Then the amount of sleep in both groups was sharply reduced to four hours, and during the day of wakefulness, after such a reduced sleep, various tests were carried out: on attention, on the speed of reactions, and this all lasted a week. And it turned out that the group that had the opportunity to stock up on sleep throughout the week showed the best performance on tests. Interestingly, even when in the third week of the experiment both groups of subjects were allowed to sleep as much as they wanted, the difference in the quality of task performance still remained.

True, one of the brightest advocates of healthy sleep, Berkeley professor Matthew Walker, says that it is impossible to fully return the "debt" of sleep. That is, if you have formed a "debt" before going to bed, you did not sleep for the prescribed eight hours, then you can not fully sleep, pay off your debts, like with a bank. He also very often in his interviews compares lack of sleep or lack of enough sleep for some time to mild brain injuries.
{{</info>}}

Melatonin: pros and cons
------------------------

Melatonin is a hormone produced in the human body by the pineal gland (pineal gland). Initially, it was an organ that reacted to the level of illumination, and its function was to perceive the level of illumination, that is, to know where it is day and where it is night. And then what happened? Animals began to grow wiser, the overgrown hemispheres of the brain pushed the third eye deeper, it lost the ability to receive information about the level of illumination. When this happened, nature urgently had to find a replacement, this replacement was found in the form of new receptors in the area of ​​​​the retina and a new path that went from the optic nerve directly to the hypothalamus, to the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the main center of our biological rhythms - such a strange path pineal gland deep into the brain and a strange explanation of why melatonin is needed.

After melatonin analogs were synthesized, they began to be used in experiments, it turned out that melatonin has a lot of effects that are considered useful: a hypnotic effect, the effect of normalizing biological rhythms. In animals - rats - it has been shown that the use of melatonin increases lifespan. Melatonin also increases the fertility of sheep, the egg production of chickens. It has a powerful antioxidant effect. Interestingly, melatonin is now being used, for example, in an in vitro fertilization regimen, because it increases the survival rate of fertilized eggs. 

What are the downsides? In fact, it is rather weak as a sleeping pill. Its hypnotic effect is quite a bit higher than the placebo effect, but it is there. And melatonin is good because it has practically no side effects, and even in large doses it is non-toxic. Therefore, we recommend, especially for the elderly, instead of taking serious sleeping pills, just use melatonin preparations. In addition, it is believed that after the age of 55, the production of one's own melatonin stops, and replacement therapy is already working here, the addition of external melatonin can help the body better regulate sleep and wake cycles. 

If we are talking about some kind of perfect sleep, then we must fight for every picogram of melatonin - accordingly, we must avoid sitting in front of big blue, huge screens and in front of big blue-screen tablets. Why blue? Because the greatest influence on the secretion of melatonin and in general on the activity of our internal clock is exerted by light in the blue part of the spectrum. We have special receptors in the eye that respond specifically to the level of light in the blue spectrum.

What to do if you can't sleep
-----------------------------

People who are generally healthy but complain about sleep quality should start with good sleep hygiene.

*   Follow the sleep schedule, that is, go to bed and get up at the same time. A conditioned reflex to falling asleep should be formed. Our biological rhythms, they mainly respond to light, but there are also social incentives, in this case, the establishment of a certain time, which also allow us to control these biorhythms a little.
*   It is very important to limit physical, mental activity before bedtime. The transition to the sleep state should be gradual, because the enemy of sleep is over-activation of the brain, which prevents the sleep systems from taking control of the brain.
*   Do not catastrophize, that is, do not give sleep an extremely important negative meaning. Nothing terrible will happen if you do not sleep one night, two or even three. Randy Gardner, the high school student who set the last recorded record for staying awake (this was in 1964) - 11 days, he is still healthy and lives in California.

There are people with a tendency to loop, this is a certain psychological feature. For starters, they need to at least read about the physiology of sleep. In all popular books it is written why we fall asleep, what contributes to this, what prevents it. Even an understanding of fairly simple physiological information will allow us to remove some points that can enhance catastrophization.

For example, very often people who come to us with sleep disorders say: “I spend 12 hours in bed, because if I spend less time in bed, I won’t get any sleep and I won’t be able to work.” This is a mistake - if they read at least something about sleep, they would understand that the quality of sleep does not depend on the time spent in bed. On the contrary, when we spend more time in bed, the periods of light sleep increase and, accordingly, the feeling of recovery becomes less available than in people who limit the time in bed and whose sleep becomes more concentrated.

The more I work with sleep disorders, the more I am convinced that in many ways the cause of sleep disorders is a person’s obsession with the problems of his sleep, and it happens because a person cannot believe and does not know that sleep is such an inevitable state that it is almost impossible to lose it. No matter how hard you try, you still will not lose it, you will still get these notorious five hours for life.

The quality of sleep is affected by a variety of things: alcohol (can disturb sleep in the second half of the night), coffee and other stimulants (harm sleep), the presence or absence of physical activity during the day, stressful events or their anticipation, depression and other diseases. As well as the situation in the bedroom: the concentration of carbon dioxide (ventilate the room), air humidity (need 40-50%), light level (the darker the better), the quality of the mattress (the best criterion: to be comfortable) and so on.

By properly adding all the components, you can achieve an improvement in the quality of a night's sleep, but not a drastic reduction in its duration. There is, however, a legend about Leonardo da Vinci, according to which he slept, perhaps only at some point in his life, for 15 minutes every four hours in order to carve out more time for creativity. From the point of view of modern science, such sleep - it is called polyphasic, it is characteristic of many animals - can really save time. The first part of the night's rest accounts for the maximum amount of deep, restorative sleep. If a person does not sleep all night, but, for example, one and a half hours four times a day, then in total he will really gain more deep sleep with less time spent in bed.

Mass experiments on the effect of polyphasic sleep on human health have not been conducted, but there have been isolated, well-described cases. The most famous of them is an experiment that was set up by the Swiss artist Francesco Jost in 1989-1990. He easily endured a 48-day marathon, during which he slept six times for 30 minutes (only three hours a day). Perhaps the main disadvantage of such a regimen was that it was difficult to combine it with a normal life: it was not so easy to go to sleep several times during the day.
