---
title: "Insomnia: eight tips that can help"
description: Poor sleep and insomnia can be the result of serious illnesses. But most often they are associated with wrong beliefs. It is with them that cognitive behavioral therapy works - a method that is considered the most reliable way to deal with sleep problems.
date: 2022-06-12T09:13:17+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T09:13:17+08:00
images:
- pToJdPS.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Pexels'
authors:
- 
interest: Health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- instructions
tags: 
---

Sleep is an evolutionarily very ancient mechanism that is present not only in all vertebrates, but also in simpler organized organisms. And according to the laws of evolution, those systems that have developed long ago and are the most important for the body are best protected - transferred to the category of automatic ones. This is how our body ensures that we do not forget how to breathe or lose control of our heartbeat.

There are certain mechanisms that keep sleep automatic.

*   Influence of light level. This mechanism more tightly regulated the sleep of our ancestors, who were completely dependent on the length of daylight hours. Today, we can adjust our sleep more flexibly by using artificial lighting or blackout curtains.
*   Sleep pressure (desire to sleep), which depends on the length of the previous wakefulness. As a rule, 16-18 hours of being awake is enough for a person to feel sleepy. And six to eight hours of sleep is enough for drowsiness to go away. However, it is worth considering the individual need for sleep.

These mechanisms are usually synchronized. That is, we experience the maximum pressure of sleep at the moment when it starts to get dark outside. And in the morning, when artificial lighting is turned on or daylight appears, we feel more invigorated.

Sleep and the mechanisms that support it are a very flexible system that adapts to our needs, work schedule, rest. However, with insomnia, the coherence of these mechanisms is violated.

{{<ads>}}

Where does insomnia come from
-----------------------------

There are two types of insomnia: acute and chronic. Acute insomnia - when on the eve of an exciting event or after it is difficult for us to fall asleep. In chronic sleep disturbances are repeated systematically and for a long time. One of the important factors in acute and chronic insomnia is an unfavorable background.

Most often, this is a character trait - anxiety or depression, depression. Other factors that predispose to the development of insomnia are night or shift work, improper sleep patterns due to frequent business trips or jet lag, irregular sleep (when a person constantly goes to bed and gets up at different times), inappropriate sleep environment (sleep with the power on). light or a working TV). There is also a genetic predisposition: there is a gene, a certain form of which is more often detected in people with insomnia.

The presence of predisposing factors is not a 100% guarantee that you will develop insomnia. Even with a genetic predisposition, a person can live his whole life in peace, not knowing what it is. Sleep disturbance develops when a trigger appears - any stress (health problems, conflicts at work or in the family, the birth of a child).

It is believed that acute insomnia should not last more than three months. During this time, the body manages to adapt to a new situation, or this situation is resolved and sleep disturbances disappear. However, if sleep disturbances persist after three months, abnormal sleep habits are usually formed and reinforced in a person and this becomes a prerequisite for the development of chronic insomnia.

Wrong habits include fear of bed, which prevents you from relaxing and falling asleep, as well as incorrect beliefs about sleep. For example, the recommendation that you need to get eight hours of sleep in order to get enough sleep and feel good does not always work and not for everyone. As a result, poor sleep habits become a major contributing factor to chronic insomnia.

Eight ways to help manage insomnia
----------------------------------

**1\. Determine your need for sleep**

Does everyone need to sleep eight hours a day? Perhaps your individual need for sleep differs from this generally accepted figure. The long New Year holidays are the perfect opportunity to check how much rest your body needs.

**2\. Stick to a routine**

The best way to normalize sleep is to go to bed and get up at the same time, even on weekends. Try to form a "conditioned reflex" to falling asleep.

**3\. Don't sleep during the day**

Short naps can be helpful, but if you need to improve the quality of your sleep at night, then try not to sleep during the day.

**4\. Create a relaxing bedtime ritual**

Before going to bed, it is necessary to limit mental and emotional stress. Do something quiet for an hour and a half before bed: it can be reading, meditation, yoga, listening to audiobooks, journaling, light cleaning. Polina Pchelina, a neurologist, candidate of medical sciences, researcher at the Institute of Psychology at the University of Bern, author of more than 20 scientific articles on the treatment of insomnia, tells more about healthy sleep rituals.

**5\. Do not stay in bed without sleep for more than 20 minutes**

If you wake up at night or can't fall asleep, get up, do quiet things and wait until drowsiness appears. Lying awake in bed sets off a vicious circle of disturbing thoughts.

{{<ads>}}

**6\. Set aside worry**

If you do find yourself replaying the same worrisome thoughts in your head, try the Worry Deferral technique - set a fixed time when you think about what worries you. Set a regular schedule for this "worry period" every day (eg 6:00 pm), don't do it for more than 30 minutes and less than two hours before bedtime. Use your attention-switching skills to return to the present, and promise yourself that you will definitely think about problems in a set period.

**7\. Try meditation before bed**

You can meditate either sitting on a pillow or lying in bed in a comfortable position. Try to choose a time when no one will distract you.

**8\. Consult a somnologist**

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is a non-drug treatment that doctors should recommend first and foremost for chronic insomnia to correct bad sleep habits. Advantages of this method:

*   safe: does not cause addiction and withdrawal syndrome;
*   more effective than taking sleeping pills;
*   the effect persists for a long time. After drug withdrawal, insomnia often returns, and cognitive behavioral therapy changes sleep habits, and these skills are maintained throughout life.

{{<info>}}
Expert comment
--------------

_Tatyana Pavlova, psychologist at the Center for Cognitive Therapy, teacher of advanced training courses in cognitive-behavioral therapy at CCT and Moscow State University_

“The first CBT technique for insomnia is called **‘sleep time limitation’** , which means we shorten the time in bed to the time that the patient thinks they are actually sleeping, and not tossing and turning, angry or worried. This may seem paradoxical at first, especially to a person who is already experiencing a lack of sleep.

However, if we remember how the sleep pressure mechanism works, we will understand that the deficit we create will further allow the sleep pressure to build up and provide better, deeper sleep the next night. Falling asleep will become faster, and sleep will become more consolidated, not interrupted by nocturnal awakenings.

When establishing a sleep schedule, we start from how many hours the patient sleeps, according to his diary. We take the average value for one to two weeks - it will become the period of time when the patient can be in bed. When choosing the time to go to bed and get up, we focus on the earliest time at which the patient needs to get up, for example for work. And from this time we count the number of hours of sleep and find the time of bedtime. That is, if the patient gets up for work at seven in the morning, then the bedtime will be at two in the morning. This regimen must be observed on weekdays, weekends and holidays, so that the body gets used to and knows when to sleep and when to be awake. The recommended time in bed should be at least five hours, so as not to provoke a really serious lack of sleep.

Of course, the patient should not sleep five hours for the rest of his life. Gradually, it is necessary to increase the time spent in bed by 15–20 minutes due to earlier laying, for example. If during the week the sleep efficiency remains at a high level, then we add another 15-20 minutes. And thus we reach the time for which he gets enough sleep and which does not stretch his sleep.

It is important to remember that sleep restriction causes regular daytime sleepiness. Daytime sleep in this case is categorically contraindicated, because it will slow down the buildup of sleep pressure. To combat daytime sleepiness, you can adjust the level of lighting. For example, go outside, because natural daylight is the best way to suppress drowsiness. If it is not possible to go outside, then you need to ensure the maximum level of lighting in the room - open windows or turn on bright artificial light.
{{</info>}}
