---
title: "How to Reboot: Four Approaches to a Good Weekend"
description: Universal advice says that the right weekend is time spent with family, in nature without a smartphone, or studying a foreign language. But what if they don't have energy or they just don't inspire?
date: 2022-06-11T13:38:50+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T13:38:50+08:00
images:
- 8uE6RJq.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Peter Nicholls / Reuters'
authors:
- reminder
interest: health
channel: 
- mindfulness
- instructions
tags: 
---

In a modern society obsessed with efficiency and optimization, one hundred percent employment is considered an unconditional virtue, says Brian O'Connor, professor and head of the School of Philosophy at University College Dublin. Therefore, we always try to give all our best, without thinking that forces are not an endless resource and sometimes they still need to be restored. Otherwise, after some time, problems may begin: constant congestion can increase the risks of developing cardiovascular disease and depression. The only way to deal with this is to change your attitude towards free time.

Figure out what you're tired of
-------------------------------

For many, the ideal weekend getaway is to make up for what we spent in the week. Sounds simple, but the secret is to pinpoint exactly how tired you are. With mental and physical fatigue, the worst option for rest is to do nothing.

If you do not distract your brain with new experiences (travel, socializing, art, sports), you will be doomed all weekend to chew on problems in your mind that have already tired you over the previous days. The best remedy for physical tension is fresh air. 

Long walks in the woods (as well as in a park, in the mountains, or along a river bank) clear your head — the scientific basis for this thesis was laid in the 1980s by psychologists Rachel and Stephen Kaplan, who developed the Attention Recovery Theory. Based on their observations, they found that being in nature is a powerful way to restore the working capacity of the brain after an overstrain, a way to feel refreshed, restore the ability to concentrate and think more clearly. As psychotherapist and mindfulness expert Donald Altman explains, this may be due to the fact that during such walks the brain receives a huge amount of new stimuli. And diversity for him is one of the main ways to reboot. An additional relaxing effect can be provided by exposure to daylight: according to scientists, it can enhance the synthesis of serotonin and oxytocin.

Another thing is stress.

{{<ads>}}

If you are not so much tired as nervous, then idleness and sleep are the most effective medicine, among the recommendations:

*   stay at home;
*   lie in bed;
*   do not plan new cases;
*   turn off the TV, phone and internet;
*   take a walk to the refrigerator (for water or fruit to maintain water balance).

By the way, recent studies have proven that the idea of ​​sleeping off the weekend for the whole week has scientific grounds.

{{<info>}}
Be alone
--------

Loneliness is another condition that society is wary of. It seems to us that to be successful, you need to constantly be in contact with others. And although there is really nothing good in long-term isolation and lack of communication, short, but regular pastime alone with yourself, on the contrary, is useful. This makes it possible to take a break from pressure from others: stop taking into account someone's interests for a while, realize other people's desires, obey orders. And, as a result, relax, focus on yourself and find inner balance. This ultimately makes us more productive when we need to get back to work.
{{</info>}}

Treat things like a broken water heater
---------------------------------------

This idea comes from Princeton time management specialist Laura Vanderkam. She tells how she interviewed a businesswoman who had several children. If Laura had asked at the beginning of the week if she had seven hours a week for yoga, volunteering, or poetry classes, she would have answered no. But then the entrepreneur's boiler broke down, flooding the basement - and she had to find these seven hours to eliminate the consequences. 

We also often do not have time for leisure activities on weekends that would make them rich and valuable. What if we changed that and, using the Vanderkam's advice, set priorities? There are 168 hours in a week. Let's say you work 40 hours a week and even spend ten hours a day in bed - still a whole 58 hours left for important things.

A good time to plan a weekend getaway is Friday around lunchtime. Think about three to five things that are important for you to note in the “results of the year” in order to understand that you really rested to the maximum. Perhaps you love to sing, or you want to be active, educate, volunteer, meet up with friends regularly, and learn new things about biology, neuroscience, and artificial intelligence. Let Friday night be devoted to vocal lessons, Saturday to volunteering with children, and Sunday to reading and listening to non-fiction on topics that interest you. Meetings with friends are also better to plan in advance. And sometimes it’s useful to spend half a day just alone without social networks, books and TV shows – for example, a walk or workout will do.

{{<ads>}}

Switch and organize your thoughts
---------------------------------

The brain reboots when something around changes and you need to perform unusual, but pleasant tasks. For example, you like to study, so you can go to, say, the Lenin Museum in Gorki and immerse yourself in the history of the revolution or even Lenin's health problems for three hours. To prepare, you can read something on the topic in advance: for example, there is a chapter about the assassination attempt on Lenin and his strokes in the wonderful book by the Dutch surgeon Arnold van de Laar “Incision. History of surgery in 28 operations. Another option is to go to a lecture on a topic of interest. Preferably in a small audience so that you can interact with the speaker. Another way to reboot is emotional: warm, free communication with friends, family, joint trips somewhere - something for which there is simply not enough time on weekdays.

{{<info>}}
listen to music
---------------

It's a great way to rewire emotions. “Music can lift us out of depression or make us cry—it’s orange juice tonic for the ears,” writes famed neurologist Oliver Sacks in Musicophilia: Stories of Music and the Brain. But if you want to relax and relieve the nervousness that has accumulated over the week, ideally you need to choose the appropriate music - setting you in a serene mood, follows from the results of a study conducted by scientists at the University of Pennsylvania. They played Marconi Union's "Weightless" to patients going in for surgery, and it was almost as calming as the drug benzodiazepine.
{{</info>}}

Ordering allows you to discard all the excess that has accumulated over the week, and in a sense relieves anxiety. For example, try 30-40 minutes of complete solitude to review the week and plan for the future. Meditation also helps (normal - with an application like Calm) and, oddly enough, running. When you run 10-15 km, a lot of things fit in your head by itself and a lot of ideas are born.

Make a list of things that make you happy
-----------------------------------------

For many, the weekend is not a vacation, but rather days when you can work less hard. And if someone does not work in the usual sense, then at least he works on himself - on his personal, physical or professional development. Some consider this a legacy of the Russian 90s, when you had to quickly adapt in order to survive. But, most likely, the problem is wider. How else to explain the endless supply of time management books on the international market? There is, for example, the approach of James Wallman, author of Time and How to Spend It. Before you start to relax in any way, he suggests checking whether this activity meets seven criteria. For example, does it increase your social status? Does it improve your relationship? Is it complicated enough? These are great questions to ask yourself from time to time.

{{<ads>}}

But no matter how we strive for perfection, we must remember that rest is when you do something simply because you want to. Or, on the contrary, you do nothing because you don't want to. One way to have a good rest is to make as big a list as possible of what you like to do, regardless of whether it increases your social status. From massage to reading in the bath and putting together a puzzle. The list is often updated and this is a pleasant feeling - as if you recognize yourself a little better. This gives the so-called non-intense positive emotions, which help fight non-intense negative emotions. We encounter the latter dozens of times a day - when the computer freezes or we are cut off on the road. If non-intense positive emotions prevail, then, as psychologists write, a state of calmness, serenity and fullness sets in.

{{<info>}}
Sunday evening: don't think about Monday
----------------------------------------

“Sunday syndrome” is a psychological phenomenon where mood deteriorates and anxiety levels rise at the end of the weekend due to having to return to work. Suzanne Degge-White, a professor at Northern Illinois University, advises to get rid of the "Sunday Syndrome" in the following ways:

*   Try to finish all the important and difficult things on Friday, to solve as many problematic tasks as possible. This will give you confidence that Monday morning will pass at least calmly, and you will wait for it with less longing.
*   Don't get your work clothes ready and don't pack your bag, don't make a plan for the coming week on a Sunday evening. Better do it on a Monday morning.
*   And on Sunday evening, plan something nice. Find a new recipe and cook something delicious with your family, visit (but don't stay up late) and play board games, turn on your favorite series. In general, use all the guilty pleasures you know - now is the time.
{{</info>}}