---
title: "Meditation for those who don't meditate"
description: Meditation has long ceased to be associated with religious practices - scientists recognize that this is an interesting neurobiological phenomenon. It helps regulate emotions and deal with stress. Here are some methods that will suit even beginners
date: 2022-06-11T13:45:09+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T13:45:09+08:00
images:
- NczuFjR.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Carlos Osorio / Reuters'
authors:
- reminder
interest: health
channel: 
- mindfulness
- instructions
tags: 
---

Meditation with an egg
----------------------

We were told about this method by a psychotherapist who specializes in anxiety disorders. We must take a raw egg and try to put it so that it stands and does not fall. On the blunt side or sharp - it does not matter. You can also choose any surface for this meditation: a wooden table, a napkin or a sofa - the complexity of the exercise will depend on this. But it really doesn't matter if you can put an egg or not, the most important thing is to focus your attention and all your efforts on one simple task. By the way, you don't have to use a real egg.

Entrepreneurs have already reimagined this meditation and launched a Kickstarter fundraising campaign to produce a “thinking egg” out of wood, stone and brass. The idea went so well that they managed to raise more than 188 thousand Canadian dollars (about 9 million rubles) instead of the declared 10 thousand. Today, an egg can be ordered on the company's website for $16 (800 rubles).

Meditation while walking
------------------------

Instructions for this meditation are given by clinical psychologist Tara Brah, a world-renowned teacher of mindfulness meditation. The first thing she says is just stand up and feel your body upright. Notice how your feet press on the floor, how your palms touch your hips, pay attention to all the micromovements of the muscles that allow you to align your posture and take a comfortable standing position.

Now it's time to walk. But you should not go for a walk, because when you walk your goal is to come somewhere. In this meditation, the goal is simply to watch how the body moves in space. Therefore, you need to choose a distance that you can cover in 10-15 steps - for example, in the office, in the apartment or in the yard - and walk back and forth. Watch how with each step the feet rise, the knees bend, the calves tense. Choose the pace of walking that will allow you to be constantly present in the body, to be aware of its position in space. Tara Brah says that at first most people walk quickly, which corresponds to a tense state of mind, but by the end of meditation, the movements slow down and the person becomes more relaxed.

{{<ads>}}

Meditation while waiting
------------------------

Queuing at the airport or in the store is a stress factor. This exercise will help reduce the amount of negative emotions. As in the previous meditation, first concentrate on yourself: listen to your breath, feel how your feet are on the ground. Be aware of whether you are cold or hot, whether your muscles are tense. Then look around and mentally note what kind of people are standing next to you. It is very important to do this without judgment, just to state. For example, if you're at the grocery store, psychologist Mike Brooks suggests looking into what's in the carts of people near you. But, again, without any judgment. This will reduce irritation. If you realize that you are evaluating the choices of other people or themselves, just pay attention to this by noting to yourself: "Evaluation."

Renowned meditation instructor Sharon Salzberg recommends going further. All people are looking for happiness, just like you. Try to mentally sincerely wish everyone standing in line unconditional happiness - this practice can radically change your mood.

Meditation in the shower
------------------------

“5-10 minutes of a warm shower is ideal to warm up and cleanse the skin without compromising the protective lipid layer,” says famous American surgeon David Greiner. For the sake of this, we take a shower, but you can expand its options. “In the shower you are alone, isolated from the outside world and everyday stimuli - the right setting to try simple meditation,” says mindfulness instructor Nancy O'Hara. The shower combines two meditative factors.

**Sound impact** . Unlike screaming or a phone ringtone, measured and monotonous sounds such as the roar of the surf, the rustling of leaves or the sound of running water calm the brain, signaling that there is no danger, explains Orphe Buxton, professor of biobehavioral health at the University of Pennsylvania. Another property of "safe sounds": they can distract attention from disturbing internal signals - unpleasant thoughts.

**Tactile impact.** Meditation in the soul is a bodily practice. No need to imagine how water washes away stress from you. Just focus on the skin. To do this, meditation coach Lauryn Roche advises starting the procedure with cool water. It will immediately switch your attention from internal experiences to external sensations - this is enough to start a short bodily meditation.

{{<ads>}}

Meditation during a red traffic light
-------------------------------------

This practice for motorists will only take 30 seconds. Stopping at a red traffic light, turn off the radio and put all your attention on breathing, try to slow it down. Breathe like this until the green light turns on.

Another option: focus on momentary sensations. On the hands on the steering wheel. How you sit in your chair. How confident are your feet on the mat. This will help you take your mind off thoughts about the past or future for a few seconds and understand how you feel at the moment, blogger Janet Dane writes.

{{<info>}}
Slow down practice
------------------

Not so much a way to meditate as an exercise in mindfulness, emotional and cognitive flexibility, which makes us more aware. The practice of slowing down consists of two basic and very simple steps at first glance. First, choose something to do. Second: do it twice as slow as usual.

You can try to slow down, again by taking a shower. Step into the shower in slow motion and open the faucet as slowly as possible. Without moving, stand for a while under water, feeling the drops fall on your skin and drain. Then - twice as slowly as you used to do it - reach for the shampoo, slowly open it and start slowly, trying to feel every movement, rub it into the scalp. As University of Nevada-Reno professor Steven Hayes says, in the process, you may want to start moving faster. Or thoughts will appear that you are acting stupid, and that it does not make any sense. This is fine. Record these thoughts. But keep moving slowly. So you will pump the skill of acceptance and learn not to let thoughts automatically control your behavior.
{{</info>}}