---
title: "“I will look stupid”: how to overcome the fear of public speaking"
description: 'The fear of public speaking is one of the top 10 most common phobias in the world. It is understandable: you are alone against a huge audience. To overcome fear, you need to understand the causes of its occurrence.'
date: 2022-06-11T17:21:20+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T17:21:20+08:00
images:
- hYVpiYU.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- r-insight
interest: self development
channel: 
- flexible skills
- instructions
tags: 
- business speech
---

In the thematic literature, one can find different points of view on the nature of the fear of speaking: some say that this is an absolute norm and a natural reaction of the body, others convince of the complete irrationality of this phenomenon. In order to offer an effective solution to the problem, you need to specify this fear - to find out: what exactly scares the speaker so much? To do this, for several years we at Business Speech Science Research have been conducting a study inviting training participants to make a list of the “worst fears” associated with public speech. It is curious, but each time approximately the same options fell into this list, which can be conditionally divided into four groups.

**1\. Fears related to audience behavior**

For example: "Listeners will sit with stone faces" or "Listeners will be constantly distracted (for example, sitting on the phone)."

**2\. Fears associated with their own behavior during the performance**

For example: “I won’t be able to convey the main idea”, “I will look stupid”, “I will forget to say something important”.

**3\. Fears associated with possible force majeure circumstances**

For example: “During the performance, the equipment will fail” or “I will have a tremor, dizziness, trembling in my voice.”

**4\. Fears associated with the result of the performance**

{{<ads>}}

For example: "My self-esteem will drop due to a bad performance" or "There will be negative comments."

The study also revealed leaders among the fears associated with speaking in public. Here they are, the speaker's four "very, most terrible fears".

1.  The stone faces of the people in the audience.
2.  Fear of looking stupid.
3.  Physical discomfort.
4.  Negative evaluation of the audience.

An interesting conclusion suggests itself - three of the four most powerful fears are associated with the need for social approval. This is quite natural, since we are social beings and it is extremely important (and sometimes simply vital) for us to accept society. Therefore, most of us are afraid of being rejected by the audience. This is what causes the most discomfort during the performance.

What annoys listeners
---------------------

If we are most afraid of causing disapproval and irritation in the audience, it would be logical to find out what annoys the listeners the most and not allow this in our speeches. This is where another study of ours comes to the rescue. As part of it, we learned what factors annoy people in the hall the most in terms of form and content.  
  
{{<ads>}}

Top 5 annoying factors in terms of content.

1.  Lack of structure.
2.  Lack of main idea.
3.  Few specifics, examples, illustrations.
4.  The speaker is saying the obvious.
5.  Too much information for a specific time.

Top 5 annoying factors in terms of form.

1.  Monotonous speech and weak voice.
2.  Overly expressive, grotesque presentation.
3.  The speaker does not include the audience.
4.  The speaker demonstrates nervous behavior (obvious excitement).
5.  Closed poses.

Given these data, you can prepare your speech in such a way as to arouse the approval of the audience instead of irritation. This will mitigate the risks associated with the speaker's common fears. It is necessary to keep the interests of the audience in focus and focus on the quality preparation of the content and rehearsal of the presentation form.

Recipes for overcoming anxiety
------------------------------

What will help to prepare well and increase the likelihood of a positive reaction from the audience, and therefore, to remove the cause of most of the “worst fears”? Here are seven simple yet helpful tips.

**1\. Analyze the audience in advance - its composition, level of knowledge and interest, values ​​and cultural characteristics, needs and motivation.**

Then you will be able to predict the reaction of the audience to your speech and, most importantly, prepare a competent speech both in terms of content and in terms of the form itself. Knowing what audience you will be speaking to will answer many questions and help you prepare a speech that hits the mark.

{{<ads>}}

**2\. Study the regulations in advance - under what circumstances the performance will take place, what is the technical equipment and features of the site, how comfortable is the listener.**

Usually little attention is paid to this aspect of preparation, and often the speech does not go as the speaker planned.

**3\. Formulate the main idea of ​​the speech and think about how it can be distinguished using repetition, lexical or intonational emphasis.**

Illustrate each thought. To do this, think through and add to the speech a sufficient number of examples, facts, figures and stories that are relevant to the audience.

**4\. Write down the structure of the speech in advance and stick to it during the speech.**

By the way, ancient speakers resorted to various ways of presenting material and used, for example:

*   inductive method - from the particular to the general;
*   deductive - from the general to the particular;
*   analogy method - comparison of various facts, events and phenomena;
*   historical method - presentation of the material in chronological order;
*   concentric method - the arrangement of material around the most important and striking problem.

{{<ads>}}

**5\. Add interactive.**

Remember that listeners remember best not what they heard and saw, but what they did. Ask questions, engage in discussion, offer to speak or share opinions, organize voting. It is important that the audience is fully involved in the process, and not a passive party.

**7\. Rehearse the upcoming presentation (first the content, then the form).**

In front of the mirror, with friends, in front of myself. Practice until you are satisfied with the result. Alternatively, record your performance on some medium. Listen to yourself, note what mistakes and shortcomings there are in your speech. Estimate the pace (average speech speed is 120 words per minute, this is the optimal speed for the audience to understand). And do not neglect the rehearsal on the spot.

All this will allow, on the one hand, to significantly reduce the level of uncertainty, and on the other hand, to increase the level of your preparation and the level of satisfaction and interest from the audience.

And yes, there is no need to be afraid - you need to prepare well for the upcoming performance. Let anxiety be your ally!

**About the study**

The study was conducted by the Business Speech Science Research social communications laboratory in February-November 2020 among 340 employees of domestic and international companies: 45% men, 55% women; age from 25 to 50 years.
