---
title: "The blonde who conquered Wall Street: Linda Raschke’s trading rules"
description: Linda Raschke is a famous female trader who developed a unique trading system. For 35 years in the market, she created her own company, achieved success in the profession and public recognition. We study her approaches to trading
date: 2022-06-12T01:35:24+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T01:35:24+08:00
images:
- zHhmo2D.jpg
caption: 'Photo: lindaraschke.net'
authors:
- Karina Karimova
interest: Investments
channel: 
- shares
- personal finance
tags: 
---

Linda Bradford Raschke is a famous and talented trader. She first [came into contact](https://blog.roboforex.com/blog/2019/10/04/trading-strategies-that-were-a-revolution-three-strategies-of-linda-raschke/#:~:text=Mostly%2C%20Linda%20Raschke%20traded%20S%26P,3%2D4%20trades%20a%20day.) with the stock market as a child, when her father asked her to help flip through stock charts in search of patterns. Growing up, Raschke began to work on the stock exchange. And in 1992 she founded her own company LBR Group.

Raschke [traded](https://blog.roboforex.com/blog/2019/10/04/trading-strategies-that-were-a-revolution-three-strategies-of-linda-raschke/#:~:text=Mostly%2C%20Linda%20Raschke%20traded%20S%26P,3%2D4%20trades%20a%20day.) futures on the S&P 500 and successfully applied her own trading systems in the foreign exchange and commodity markets. In 2015, she ended her career as an active trader and began to lecture and organize seminars for analysts and market makers.

## The Art of Rising Above the Market

Linda Raschke [looks](https://www.warriortrading.com/linda-bradford-raschke/) at the markets, sort of "rising" above them a little: she looks at the internal state of the market and at a wider time frame to form her vision of short-term price movement. She highlights the importance of this approach as it provides insight into the market context.

{{<ads>}}

Raschke says he doesn't know any traders who make a living trading the five-minute chart, which doesn't give a complete picture of what's going on in the market. She [looks](https://www.warriortrading.com/linda-bradford-raschke/) at the daily and weekly charts as well as market breadth and internals.

## Trading rituals

Linda Raschke likes [to prepare](https://www.warriortrading.com/linda-bradford-raschke/) for the opening of stock exchanges the day before, right after the close of the trading day. This allows her to enter the next trading day with a clear mind. She doesn't like to rely too much on analytics when trading, she prefers to simply react to incoming information. According to the trader, when she only prepares for work in the morning, the analytical approach begins to prevail in her mind, which, in her opinion, is not useful for trading.

**[Linda Raschke's Tips](https://www.warriortrading.com/linda-bradford-raschke/) for Preparing to Trade**

*   Write down the closing prices, the previous day's highs and lows, and the inside market levels.
*   Predict price movements for tomorrow. Will it be a trend day or a consolidation day? If the day is a trend, will the market move from the top to the bottom or from the bottom to the top?
*   Try to guess the next day's high/low. In her opinion, your first guess is the best one.

Raschke [chooses](https://www.warriortrading.com/linda-bradford-raschke/) his trading style every day based on his price action. On trend days, she acts in accordance with it, and on consolidation days, she acts like a trader trading with a reversion to the average value. The nature of the day also dictates whether it is a buy, sell or short day.

{{<ads>}}

The Raschke trading strategy [does not require](https://atozmarkets.com/news/top-linda-raschke-trading-rules/) any indicators. Her trading system is a short-term, intraday trading system based on the idea of ​​a false range breakout. It consists in identifying the formation of a specific intraday candle. Mostly it should be a candle with a long body and short shadows. If the body is 80% or more of the whole candle, and the shadows form 20% or less, then this can give an idea of ​​the next day's trades: such a candle is called an impulse.

{{<info>}}
_**Japanese candlesticks**_  are a type of interval chart that displays changes in stock quotes and commodity prices.

_**The candle body**_ is formed by the initial and final prices for the selected time period.

_**The shadow of the candle**_  is the maximum and minimum value of the candle for this period.
{{</info>}}

## Turtle soup strategy

The "turtle soup" strategy is medium or long term and does not require any indicators. The trading position is held for two to three days, and the key moment of the strategy is the 20-day price range. For this strategy, the calculation starts on any day of the market analysis. It [is based](https://atozmarkets.com/news/top-linda-raschke-trading-rules/) on a false range breakout.

The main [work](https://atozmarkets.com/news/top-linda-raschke-trading-rules/) begins when the low or high of the range is broken no earlier than three days later. Then it is considered that the price has reached this maximum or minimum. After the price returns to the range, an order is opened that moves inside the range. The same thing happens when the low is broken. A buy order is opened if the price enters a range of 10 pips from the low of the initial range. The ideal trailing stop for trading is 50-70 pips.

{{<info>}}
**_Trailing stop_**  is a tool that limits the risk per trade.
{{</info>}}

Linda Raschke's 12 [Trading Rules](https://atozmarkets.com/news/top-linda-raschke-trading-rules/)

1.  Plan your trading and trade according to your plan.
2.  Stay positive no matter how much money you have lost.
3.  Constantly set yourself higher trading goals.
4.  Successful traders are not afraid to buy high and sell low.
5.  Successful traders always take the time to study the markets.
6.  Always strive to remain patient, persevering, determined, and to take only rational actions.
7.  Never cancel a stop loss once you have placed it.
8.  Never enter the market because you are worried about waiting.
9.  Losses make a trader diligent, but do not bring profit. Use every loss as an opportunity to enrich your market knowledge.
10.  The most difficult task in speculation is not market prediction, but self-control. Successful trading can be difficult and frustrating. But don't forget that you are the most important element in the equation for success.
11.  Remember that a bear market can return in one month what took three months to form in a bull market.
12.  Don't focus too much on losses. Those who agonize over their losses always miss the next opportunity that is most likely to make a profit.

Trading strategy "Anti"

The main idea of ​​the "Anti" trading strategy is [to trade](https://atozmarkets.com/news/top-linda-raschke-trading-rules/) with the trend after the completion of the correction. Basically, the system was used with the stochastic indicator to determine the rollback and continuation of the main trend.

{{<info>}}
**The** **stochastic**  indicator is a technical analysis indicator that shows the position of the current price relative to the price range for a certain period in the past.
{{</info>}}

Entry must occur when both lines are moving in the same direction.

{{<ads>}}

{{<info>}}
**Linda Raschke co-wrote** Trading Sardines: Lessons in the Markets by a Lifelong Trader with Lawrence A. Connors.
{{</info>}}

## Trading tools by Linda Raschke

Linda Raschke's trading tools are very useful for finding upcoming momentum. She [uses a](https://atozmarkets.com/news/top-linda-raschke-trading-rules/) five-day simple moving average and a two-day rate of change to determine a long-term trade.  
  
**Five-day simple moving average**

Raschke uses a five-day simple moving average to determine the trend. It is the result of averaging the security price for the selected period (in this case, five days). Once calculated, the final value is displayed on the chart as a curved line so that traders can view the data as smoothed rather than focusing on daily price fluctuations.  
  
Raschke conducted extensive testing and research of this indicator and built her models based on it. If the market closes above the five-day simple moving average for seven days in a row, she considers it to be continuous momentum. In this situation, the Raschke models [show](https://atozmarkets.com/news/top-linda-raschke-trading-rules/) that the accuracy of maintaining the trend is about 50%.

There are far fewer losing trades in this system than winning trades because Raschke treats the five-day SMA as a support line and the trade is closed on the first close below the five-day average.  
  
**Two-day rate of change**

Raschke uses the two-day rate of change of short-term momentum indicators to develop a trend for the trading day. One of the foundations of trading psychology is that momentum precedes price. Moreover, an increase in aggression from bears or bulls before we see price action will be the result of said aggression or momentum. Raschke applies this method with a two-day [rate](https://atozmarkets.com/news/top-linda-raschke-trading-rules/) of change.

**Author:** *Karina Karimova*