---
title: "Almost a Retailer: How Shopify is Building an Anti-Amazon Business"
description: 'Shopify, a service for creating online stores, is strengthening its position: the company is the second largest e-commerce sales company in the United States after Amazon. Unlike a well-known competitor, Shopify is almost unknown to the general public, but this is the secret of its success.'
date: 2022-06-13T01:29:56+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T01:29:56+08:00
images:
- TbdZYsZ.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Kevin Van Paassen / Bloomberg'
authors:
- Elizaveta Anokhina
- Arina Doynikova
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
---

In September 2020, Eric Girouard from Boston finally decided to open his own business - an online shoe store for workers Brunt. He was inspired by his wife Sarah, who started selling winter hats online a few years ago. She is engaged in business in her free time and earns from $25,000 to $40,000 a year.

"It's just a generic site, but it works well and makes her money," Girouard says. He was sure that he would have to invest about $ 100 thousand in his project, but in the end he did not spend even $ 25 thousand (this amount includes the salaries of two employees). Both Eric and Sarah made their websites using Shopify, a Canadian online store building service founded in 2006.

Eric is one of nearly 700,000 entrepreneurs who signed up on Shopify in 2020. Some have decided to start a business from scratch because they lost their job or decided to take advantage of the e-commerce boom. Some retailers have made websites for existing stores to keep afloat during the pandemic.

As a result, Shopify’s revenue for 2020 grew by as much as 86% and reached $2.9 billion. As is the case with most other e-commerce players, the company’s shares, having seriously dipped in March 2020, soared to a record $1.4 thousand in February 2021 (now hovering around $1,200) and Shopify became the most valuable Canadian public company, surpassing even the National Bank of Canada.

{{<ads>}}

Do it yourself
--------------

However, the roots of the company are German. Toby Lütke was born in Koblenz, a small town in western Germany. On his sixth birthday, he received a computer from his parents and soon became seriously interested in programming. Lutke could sit for hours in front of the screen, forgetting about everything in the world. Having somehow completed the 10th grade, Lütke did not see the need to continue his formal education and decided to devote himself entirely to his beloved work. At 16, he got a job as a programmer at Siemens. However, there was another passion in his life - snowboarding. It was she who led Lutke to two decisions that turned his whole life upside down.

Once he was vacationing with friends in Whistler, a Canadian ski resort, where he met a girl named Fiona McKean. A romance quickly began between them, and a year later Lutke moved to Ottawa, her hometown.

At a party at Fiona's parents' house, he met a family friend, Scott Lake. Sociable and energetic, he quickly won over the modest and silent Lutke. They quickly found a common interest - entrepreneurship. Lake dreamed of creating his own startup, and he already had two attempts under his belt. Lutke, on the other hand, began to get tired of working in a large corporation and also thought about opening his own business. “I realized that I just couldn’t work for other people, and that was probably what prompted me to create a company,” Lütke later explained. Without thinking twice, they joined forces.

{{<ads>}}

The original plan was simple: Lütke and Lake wanted to sell snowboards online. Lütke took on the development of the site, but immediately ran into a lack of suitable software. “I tried to create our online store based on several systems, such as Miva, OsCommerce and Yahoo,” the entrepreneur said. “The truth is, they were absolutely terrible. The last straw was when I couldn't fit the design I created with Yahoo's infrastructure." Desperate to find a ready-made solution, Lutke began to make a platform for the future site on his own, taking as a base the recently developed framework (a software product that simplifies the creation of complex software. - _RBC Pro_ ) Ruby on Rails. The store, which launched in 2004, was named Snowdevil.

Trade was brisk, but the site itself attracted a lot more attention than the goods presented on it. The appearance of Ruby on Rails was a big event in the IT industry, and Lütke was one of the first developers to create software based on it. Snowdevil was highly regarded in the IT community, and then Lutka was approached by entrepreneurs and developers who faced the same problems as himself. Then Lutke and Lake realized that the infrastructure on which their site was based had much more potential than snowboards.

Convincing friends and family that selling tools to create online stores is not such a dubious undertaking, they raised $200,000 to launch a new company. The project was named Jaded Pixel, and for the product created by Lütke, Lake came up with a more concise and sonorous name - Shopify. As the third co-founder, they were joined by a German programmer, a friend of Lütke, Daniel Weinand. Shopify was an online store builder with a simple and intuitive interface that a person without programming skills could use. The service provided the retailer with hosting, a domain name, order tracking, basic analytics tools, and so on. Simple functionality was ideal for novice entrepreneurs, as it allowed them to set up all processes as quickly as possible.

The start was not very successful - Shopify's monthly revenue was about $ 8 thousand. But everything changed after the change in business model in 2007. Shopify, which previously took a percentage of user sales, has switched to a subscription model. Now the fee for working with the service has become fixed, and customers could not be afraid that they would give more and more money as a commission every month. Business began to rapidly gain momentum. In 2008, Shopify was already making about $60,000 a month.

{{<ads>}}

Reluctant CEO
-------------

However, at the same time, Scott Lake decided to leave the company because he did not feel the same drive as during the launch. “Over time, the process ceased to be as exciting for me, lawyers, accountants appeared. Having to keep track of all this was starting to get a little annoying,” Lake explained. The problem was that he was actually the CEO of the company. Lutke was engaged in product development and did not even think that he would ever have to take over the "OS". “I basically had to complete the MBA course in two weeks,” the entrepreneur recalled. He was looking for a replacement for Lake for a long time, but he was dissuaded by one of the company's first investors. “Toby, you will never find someone who cares about Shopify as much as you do,” he told Lutka. “That is what you are looking for, and it is time for you to stop looking.” So Lütke became the head of the company, and,

Shopify was unrivaled in terms of convenience, but the functionality remained virtually unchanged. And if the basic tools were enough for start-up entrepreneurs and small companies, then for larger firms it was not enough. Lütke and Weinand found a solution that was ingenious in its simplicity. Instead of developing new features themselves, they turned Shopify into an Application Programming Interface (API) platform. With it, third-party developers could create new tools for Shopify and sell them in the app store built into the service. The launch took place in 2009, on the company's third birthday. A year later, Shopify launched a mobile phone app so that users can manage their business on any device they choose. The move was timely: from 2009 to 2010, the volume of purchases,

To grow further, the company needed new forces and new funds. Harley Finkelstein took over as chief operating officer. A cheerful and sociable man with an economic education and an entrepreneurial background, he was the exact opposite of the "techie" Lütke. His acumen and experience helped the company adjust its strategy and attract the attention of venture capitalists.

{{<ads>}}

In 2010, Shopify made its first round of investments, raising $7 million. Less than a year later, the firm raised another $15 million in a B round. Finally, in 2013, the company raised another $100 million from investors. valley from Ottawa, but he flatly refused. Before the pandemic, when everyone worked in offices, a huge number of companies fought for the attention of IT specialists in California, and, as a rule, the most generous and famous won. In addition, the lack of such competition in the Canadian capital helped Shopify avoid turnover - there is less chance that a talented employee will be poached by competitors.

The company had money to buy promising startups and develop a product line. In 2013, Shopify carried out a massive redesign and added 60 new tools. More features, more users. By 2013, there were already 50,000 merchants on the platform, revenue was about $50 million, and in March 2015, shortly before the company's IPO, 162,000 retailers used Shopify. Not only the client base was rapidly expanding, but also the geography of the platform: in 2017, the service had 500,000 users from 175 countries. Shopify passed the mark of 1 million sellers in a year.

"A brand behind other brands"
-----------------------------

Finkelstein, commenting on the company's success in the first quarter of 2021, modestly noted that Shopify is simply trying to "make it easier to do business." It would seem that everyone in the market is trying to please their customers, but Shopify has followed an out-of-the-box strategy from the very beginning. Instead of attracting the attention of large players, the company has chosen medium and small businesses as its target audience.

Shopify now offers a package of services for retailers with different needs and financial possibilities. The company has a free 14-day trial without a credit card and multiple plans ranging from $9 to $299 per month. Even the cheapest plan gives the user access to most of the platform's options, discounts on shipping services from partner services (DHL Express, UPS and USPS), and bonuses when using the Shopify Payments payment service.

The company offers the Shopify Plus plan for large customers for $2,000 per month. Now it is used by such giants as Pepsi, Heinz, Nestle, GE and Unilever, fast-growing startups, as well as celebrities - American model Kylie Jenner, singer Justin Bieber, rappers Eminem and Kanye West.

In addition, Shopify is actively developing an omnichannel strategy. Merchants can manage one or more stores through the Shopify App mobile application, as well as integrate advertising on social networks, on Facebook (the organization is recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation), on Instagram (the organization is recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) and Pinterest. In 2019, the Shopify Fulfillment Network service appeared, which provides storage, inventory management, collection, packaging and delivery of goods to customers. For those customers who have physical outlets, Shopify offers to use its payment terminal system, which allows you to synchronize offline and online sales.

Additionally, in 2020, the company launched the Shop App, a mobile app that allows users to search and purchase products across all stores that run on the Shopify platform. The buyer does not need to constantly indicate his data, it is enough to register once in the Shop Pay payment service and pay for purchases in different stores with one click. Now the application is used by more than 24 million active users. Since Shopify positions itself as "anti-Amazon", it deliberately does not show its involvement in the stores created on its platform. Finkelstein noted that none of the sites have their company logo because the platform "builds its brand behind the backs of other brands."

{{<ads>}}

In an interview with The Verge, he stated that "if Shopify were a retailer, it would be the second largest e-commerce player in America after Amazon." Indeed, if you look at the total sales volume (eng. Gross Merchandise Volum, GMV - the total volume of sales through the trading platform for a certain period of time) of the company, then its share in the US online retail is 8.6%. Only Amazon has more – its share reaches 39%. Unlike Amazon, which only promotes its own brand, Shopify develops an internal ecosystem and focuses on supporting and promoting merchants who use the platform.

The company retains customers not only through tariffs, flexible functionality and the ability to customize the site, but also through active interaction with sellers. The company's website has detailed instructions for starting and growing a business, as well as forums where store owners can communicate with each other. In addition, the company offers a reward to every user who brings a new client. For especially active customers, there is the Shopify Partner Program, which gives members the opportunity to share their business experience, develop websites and mobile applications for shops on Shopify, and offer their services as a marketer or designer to sellers on the platform.

Responsible Patriots
--------------------

Shopify does not forget about social responsibility either. The company actively invests in environmental projects - about $1 million a year. Among other things, the company cooperates with the environmental protection organization WeForest, which transfers a percentage of each purchase through the Shopify Payments payment service to restore forests in Africa. This allows you to attract customers interested in solving environmental problems to use Shopify services.

Shopify has partnered with the government to provide financial support to small businesses. In the first quarter of 2021, the company spent $308.6 million on loans to sellers in Canada, the US and the UK. Also in March 2021, Shopify supported the charity's new campaign, Fashion Makes Change, dedicated to fighting gender inequality.

{{<ads>}}

However, Shopify scandals could not be avoided. The company responded to the storming of the Capitol in Washington in January this year by closing two stores on its platform. One of them was run by the Donald Trump campaign organizers, and the other was owned by The Trump Organization. The case has been the subject of much criticism for the company because Shopify has always been against censorship on its platform. According to Greg Sterling, vice president of marketing company Uberall, the platform did this so as not to evoke in customers associations with the Trump brand, which then became synonymous with chaos and violence.

When it comes to corporate culture, Shopify is nowhere near Zappos, which has published a book on its core values ​​and offers paid tours of the office. However, the company seeks to improve its image in the labor market. So, Shopify has developed its own hiring mechanics. HR specialists conduct one of the stages of the interview together with other employees of the company in order to introduce the candidate to the team. Also, Shopify was one of the first to follow the new trend and switched to the “perpetual remote” mode. This allows the company to look for talented specialists not only in their native Ottawa, but throughout the world.

Like Amazon, only kinder
------------------------

Merchants mostly use the Basic plan, according to Shopify reporting, but Spotify receives a significant portion of its revenue (25% in 2020) from the Advanced plan and Shopify Plus.

Although the subscription brings Shopify about 30% of the profits, the company earns much more through additional products - the Shopify Payments service (the company takes a commission for processing payments), the Shopify Capital small business lending service, and the payment terminal system for offline sales points.

Shopify is heavily investing in startups to expand the range of value-added services and tools for merchants who use the platform. For example, in 2019, Shopify bought robotics company 6 River Systems for $450 million to automate the Shopify Fulfillment Network. In April 2021, Shopify, along with investors such as Marc Benioff, Slack and Next47 (a Siemens venture capital firm), invested in Pipe, a startup that helps companies that charge subscription fees get some of that recurring income up front.

{{<ads>}}

During the pandemic, Shopify made its first positive since going public in 2015: net profit in 2020 amounted to $319.5 million, while at the end of 2019 the company reported a loss of $124.8 million. The main driver of growth an influx of new users. As for the company's shares, analysts believe that they will continue to grow, as sales in the e-commerce segment will also grow.

However, Shopify believes that the rapid growth of financial indicators will soon slow down. “Some retailers are likely to move back to offline, and the ongoing transition to online retail, which has accelerated in 2020, will return to a more relaxed pace of growth,” said CFO Amy Shapiro.

And don't forget that Shopify is betting on small businesses, which are much more sensitive to crises. At the end of the coronavirus 2020, 30% fewer companies opened than at the beginning. Analysts also believe that most startups that use Shopify are more likely to fail in the current climate of uncertainty than continue to grow.

Among other things, Shopify is attracting more and more attention from scammers: the FakeSpot service has already identified several stores on the platform that did not sell anything, but were exclusively engaged in collecting personal data of buyers. Some retailers infringe on brand rights, others have caused customer dissatisfaction with a very poor quality of service. If the platform does not address this issue, its customers risk losing consumer trust.

Shopify is gradually outperforming the competition. In 2020, it has already overtaken eBay in terms of total product turnover. The company positions itself as a seller-friendly alternative to Amazon. However, after the release of the Shop App mobile application, which turned all the stores on the platform into one big marketplace, many people thought about whether Shopify would follow the path of the American retail giant. But for now, the app just helps to attract the attention of the buyer to the stores using the platform. Now, almost all new Shopify projects are aimed at customer retention. Turning into a “second Amazon” threatens the company with the loss of its target audience, so the company is unlikely to choose this path.

Experts are optimistic about the future of Shopify. “The pandemic has driven a massive shift to digital solutions and, in particular, contributed to the development of online retail,” said David Hines, an analyst at investment firm Canaccord Genuity. “The share of e-commerce in retail still does not reach 30%, so the potential for growth is still very large.”

**Authors:** *Elizaveta Anokhina, Arina Doynikova*