---
title: "“Temperament on the stock exchange is more important than IQ.” How the “British Buffett” invests"
description: 'His success as an investment fund manager, Anthony Bolton, earned him the nickname “British Buffett.” How he chose stocks - we learn from his investment rules'
date: 2022-06-12T01:25:13+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T01:25:13+08:00
images:
- 6Va9rEa.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Lee Jae Won / Reuters'
authors:
- Karina Karimova
interest: Investments
channel: 
- personal finance
tags: 
---

Anthony Bolton was 29 years old when he headed the British Special Situations Foundation, owned by Fidelity International. In the 28 years that he ran the fund, his average annual return [was](https://www.morningstar.in/posts/43577/how-to-be-a-smart-investor.aspx) 19.5%.

What set him apart from other investors was [his](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/stocks/news/tips-from-britains-own-buffett-to-generate-double-digit-returns-in-stocks/articleshow/80186023.cms) ability to think outside the box and independently. And the courage to go against the crowd was a key quality that allowed him to maintain such impressive results throughout his investing career.

In his book Investing with Anthony Bolton: Anatomy of a Stock Market Winner, which he co-authored with Jonathan Davis, the investor [revealed](https://www.amazon.com/Investing-Anthony-Bolton-anatomy-market/dp/1905641117) that his approach to stock selection has always been based on a wide range of company-specific data.

“My philosophy is that the more ideas I have, the better. I like to say that I want to have a wide data network,” [says the](https://www.amazon.com/Investing-Anthony-Bolton-anatomy-market/dp/1905641117) investor. The more sources are used, the more likely it is to find something really valuable, he notes.

Especially the need for new ideas increases when managing large funds, since even a huge in-house team cannot cover all issues, and its members cannot be experts in absolutely everything.

{{<ads>}}

Bolton says that before buying shares in a company, he considers several aspects related to its business.

“Firstly, if possible, I try to personally meet with the management of the company. Such communication is useful for several reasons: it helps me gain insight into the people and strategy of the business, assess the quality of the business and the key variables that affect its financial results (some of which are management dependent, others, such as sensitivity to changes in foreign exchange rates, are largely degree is not). I deeply believe that businesses cannot be equal in strength - some franchises are much better than others, and, all other things being equal, I like those whose franchises are of better quality, ”says Bolton.

In his opinion, thanks to personal communication, it is possible to build a financial model of the company. The investor prefers to [consider](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/stocks/news/tips-from-britains-own-buffett-to-generate-double-digit-returns-in-stocks/articleshow/80186023.cms) several evaluation indicators:

1.  **_P/E multiplier._**
2.  **_EV/EBIDTA multiplier._**
3.  **_Estimated free cash flow._**
4.  **_P/S or EV/S multiplier._**
5.  **_Return on investment in cash flow (CFROI) -_** to understand how the price of shares changes in relation to the capital invested.

Bolton also [notes](https://www.morningstar.in/posts/43577/how-to-be-a-smart-investor.aspx) that investors should use the method of company valuation that is most appropriate for a particular industry. For example, the P/E multiple is of little value when analyzing the stocks of a real estate firm due to the one-off nature of the gains from the sale of land. At the same time, it can be very useful for this segment to look at the P/B multiple.

{{<ads>}}

Anthony Bolton pays great attention to the quality of business balance.

“One of the vital lessons I've learned over the years is that when things go wrong, it's the companies with weak balance sheets that bring me the most money loss,” he said.

**What else Bolton [looks for when choosing assets:](https://www.amazon.com/Investing-Anthony-Bolton-anatomy-market/dp/1905641117)**

*   List of shareholders.
*   The head of the company buys or sells shares.
*   What analysts say about papers in terms of technical analysis.
*   Are stocks bought by institutional investors?
*   What do analysts of key brokers who study these papers think about the shares?

In addition, Bolton is trying to see if there is something about this stock that investors are not paying attention to today, but that could generate interest in it in the future. Such a careful study of stocks before buying can seem very difficult. However, it is this approach that ensures the success of professional investors in comparison with retail ones, says Anthony Bolton.

“The fact that many less experienced investors seem to take a simple or even ‘lazy’ approach to stock selection creates opportunities for professional investors like me who will always be more attentive to every trade,” says Bolton.

Stock picking tips from Anthony Bolton:

**Always be aware of the reason for holding shares**

Before investing in stocks, you need to understand why you are doing it. According to Bolton, this requires a thorough study, the algorithm of which was described above.

The investor believes that each person should have their own theory of why a particular stock is good for the portfolio, and from time to time this theory should be tested. The best thing to do is to analyze why investing in these stocks might fail in the future.

Bolton [says](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/stocks/news/tips-from-britains-own-buffett-to-generate-double-digit-returns-in-stocks/articleshow/80186023.cms) that no matter how positive the company's prospects seem, there will always be investors who will not like its shares. Therefore, you should try to understand the reasons for this behavior of the investor and not miss important information that could ultimately lead to problems for these stocks.

{{<ads>}}

If, after re-testing the investment theory, it turns out that the stock is doomed to failure, you need to sell it, even if the price is now lower than what you paid for it. Bolton advises investors to forget the price they paid for the share, otherwise later, when the price falls, it will become a psychological barrier for them.  
  
**Know the reason for not only buying, but also selling**

Bolton [names](https://www.morningstar.in/posts/43577/how-to-be-a-smart-investor.aspx) three main reasons for selling: something refutes the investment thesis, the asset reaches the target valuation, better paper appears.

**An investment thesis**  is an argument in favor of a specific investment strategy, supported by research and analysis.

To make sure of his own confidence in the stock, he looks for a similar company and compares them. This helps cut off the stocks that Bolton is least confident about.

**Know yourself**

There are many ways to invest in the stock market. You must be able to determine what works for you personally and suits your temperament, and stick to it at all times. Bolton [believes](https://www.morningstar.in/posts/43577/how-to-be-a-smart-investor.aspx) that the right temperament in this matter is even more important than IQ. It is necessary to have a sufficient level of intelligence, but being super smart without the right temperament is pointless, he believed. Bolton emphasizes that emotional people make bad investors.

**Author:** *Karina Karimova*