---
title: "“Are you stupid?!”: how daring marketing helped the Swedish Oatly conquer the world"
description: 'The small brand Oatly made oat milk fall in love not only with their native Sweden, but the whole world. “Bold” marketing helped the company to achieve success: it even managed to turn wars with regulators and competing corporations to its advantage.'
date: 2022-06-13T01:14:51+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T01:14:51+08:00
images:
- 5T2WgZP.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Gabby Jones / Bloomberg'
authors:
- Elizaveta Anokhina
- Arina Doynikova
interest: marketing and advertising
channel: 
- strategic marketing
tags: 
---

"Tastes like waste." Just such an amazing slogan could be found on packs of Oatly oat milk. The brand has revolutionized the way the plant-based products are added to their lattes by environmentally concerned millennials and consumed by those who are lactose intolerant. When, at the end of the 20th century, a professor at the University of Lund in Sweden, Rikard Oste, first thought about creating an analogue of cow's milk, he could hardly imagine that 30 years later his invention would become incredibly popular all over the world, and his company's shares would be traded on NASDAQ.

Nevertheless, with the help of an extraordinary approach and bold advertising moves, Oatly managed to win over not only Swedish consumers, but also alternative milk lovers around the world. In many countries, the brand name has become literally synonymous with oat milk. Here is a strategy that helped a small Scandinavian manufacturer.

From Swedish lab to Walmart
---------------------------

Oatly was founded in the early 1990s by Professor Rikard Oste and his brother Bjorn when, a few years after the invention of plant-based milk, they decided to mass-produce the product, and Oatly was born. True, after the launch, the company remained in the shadow of other producers of alternative milk for more than a decade. The real success came after Toni Petersson took over the organization in 2012. Prior to that, he ran the Swedish backpack manufacturer Bobblee for almost four years and had no experience in an FMCG company before joining Oatly. Petersson actually "reinvented" the company: he relied on environmental friendliness of production and an unusual image.

{{<ads>}}

Oatly currently has a 9.2% share of the plant-based milk market in Western Europe, with competitors including plant-based milk producers Alpro (a subsidiary of Danone) and Pacific Food. Oatly products can be found in 60,000 retail stores and 32,000 coffee shops worldwide. The environmental strategy paid off, and from 2019 to 2020, the company's revenue increased from $204 million to $421 million. “When Oatly was a very young company, the head of one of the leading dairy companies in Scandinavia visited our production. He poured our product down the sink and said we could never sell it. Fortunately, we did not follow his advice, ”recalled Bjorn Otke in an interview.

Oatly managed to interest investors with its green policy and in July 2020 raised $200 million from the American investment fund Blackstone. Celebrities have invested in the company's assets - TV presenter Oprah Winfrey and actress Natalie Portman - and former Starbucks chairman and CEO Howard Schultz. Oatly has also funded Jay-Z's media company Roc Nation, investment funds Orkila Capital and Rabo Corporate Investments.

This success led Oatly to consider going public. At the end of 2020, the company was valued at $5 billion. In May 2021, Oatly held an IPO on the NASDAQ exchange. During the listing, Oatly raised $1.43 billion and sold 84.4 million U.S. depository shares at a price of $17, the upper limit of the range set before the offering. Investors valued the company at $10 billion, five times more than last year's investment round.

Marketing without rules
-----------------------

Oatly's main weapon in allowing the small Swedish brand to win the love of customers around the world was an inventive and daring marketing strategy. The first thing Petersson did when he was at the helm of the company was to restructure it and get rid of the marketing department as such. Instead, he created a "creative division", known in the company as ODMC (Eng. Oatly's Department of Mind Control - "Oatly's Department of Mind Control"). Its employees develop new strategies and seek creative approaches to existing processes together with colleagues from other departments. “\[The process\] is somewhat chaotic, but at the same time it has huge advantages,” admitted Ishan Paran, general manager of Oatly in the UK.

{{<ads>}}

The first large-scale project of the renewed team was the packaging redesign and new advertising. Careless and recognizable, as if handwritten font, an abundance of drawings and text, an exclamation mark that appeared after the brand name - the packaging came out catchy and stood out from competitors who preferred minimalism that was fashionable at that time. The cheeky advertising slogan was a match for her: "It's like regular milk, only for people." “You can have the most amazing product in the world, but it doesn’t mean anything if you don’t have a strategy and its proper implementation,” Petersson said in an interview. “For Oatly, I was asking myself how we can make our business matter to people. That was the purpose of the marketing campaign."

Perhaps he even overdid it a little. The Swedish Dairy Association sued Oatly over the slogan and won. As a result, the company was forced to pay compensation and lost the right to use the word "milk" in the name of its products in Sweden. But Oatly managed to turn the scandal to its advantage by highlighting it on its website and in newspaper ads. “Many people thought that the attempt by Sweden's huge dairy industry to sue a small independent company was a rather stupid decision,” one Oatly manager recalled. “And brand support in the country has grown many times over.”

Since then, the company's "advertising wars" with regulators and cow's milk producers have not stopped. In 2019, the ill-fated slogan caught the attention of the EU authorities, who had questions about the comparison with regular milk: the law prohibits the use of such techniques in advertising alternative milk and products based on it. Two years later, the European Union tried to tighten the rule and ban any references and allusions to animal milk (for example, using the word "creamy"). "You are stupid?" Oatly addressed regulators in its new ad. European dairy concern Arla launched an entire advertising campaign against the brand in Sweden, after which Oatly advised customers to "pour cow's milk down the toilet."

Litigation and scandals did not scare the company. Not only did Oatly continue to use scathing slogans in their ads, but they began putting real negative customer reviews on the packaging and showing in every possible way that they don't take themselves too seriously (unlike the dairy giants). "Don't worry if you don't like this oat milk ad, it will pass by soon," the Oatly poster on the bus read. In 2021, the company first showed its ad during the Super Bowl final (in American football, the name of the final game for the title of champion of the US National Football League): Tony Petersson stood in the middle of the field with a synthesizer and, without hitting the notes, sang about oat milk. “That Super Bowl ad pissed me off,” was the phrase featured on Oatly merchandise released some time later. Self-irony has become a hallmark of Oatly and has helped her captivate a younger audience. However, the company has not forgotten about the older generation either. Oatly created Help-Dad.com to teach teens how to get skeptical parents to love oat milk.

{{<ads>}}

To expand into foreign markets, Oatly has also eschewed traditional marketing practices such as social media advertising and opted for an inventive and far-sighted promotional strategy. In 2016, the company's products appeared in the United States, but not on supermarket shelves, but in ten coffee shops in large cities. For several years, Oatly managers chose specialized establishments that make the best coffee and are very popular with local residents, and then invited them to cooperate. “If you want to get people to try oat milk for the first time, you have to be sure that this will be the best situation possible,” explained John Schoolcraft, head of creative for Oatly in the US. Baristas talk to each other a lot, and Oatly hoped that word of mouth would help gain popularity first in their community and then with their customers. The strategy worked: by the end of 2016, Oatly drinks were already sold in a thousand coffee shops in the United States, and gradually the company's products began to appear in supermarkets. By the end of 2020, the company supplied goods to 10,000 coffee shops and 8,500 US retail stores. This same approach was later successfully applied by Oatly to other regions, such as Hong Kong.

In addition, since Petersson's arrival, the company has focused on the brand's sustainable image. Oatly claims that the production of oat milk is safer for the environment than the production of animal milk: carbon dioxide emissions are reduced by 80%, land use by 79%, energy consumption by 50%. This has brought Oatly products to the attention of environmentally conscious consumers and vegans.

Scarce item
-----------

The success of the Swedish brand in the American market was overwhelming. Although almond milk is still the most popular, its newer counterpart quickly managed to take second place, displacing soy milk: sales of oat milk in the United States have grown by 1200% over the past two years, and Oatly has become a trendsetter. Despite the higher calorie content than almond-based milk (120 kcal per 100 g versus 40 kcal, respectively, figures may vary depending on the brand), oat milk is more similar in texture to the usual cow's milk. Therefore, it is better suited for cooking (for example, for baking and coffee drinks) and is liked by people who find it difficult to give up animal milk due to taste preferences. According to research firm Euromonitor International, in Western Europe, Oatly has already managed to become the second most popular alternative milk brand. In the UK and Germany, oat milk is the top-selling plant-based milk, according to Nielsen.

{{<ads>}}

However, Oatly is not as enthusiastic among many investors as it is among buyers. First of all, experts are concerned about the company's financial statements. Revenue is growing, but the company is unlikely to break even in the near future. The net loss for 2019 amounted to $35.6 million, and in 2020 - already $60.4 million. Such dynamics cannot please. At the same time, Oatly has huge capital expenditures: in 2021, the company plans to spend $ 350-400 million and about the same in a year. Of course, the company's management assumes that the demand for oat milk will grow. If the forecast is justified, then the costs will pay off with a vengeance; if not, then Oatly and its investors may start to have serious problems.

And there are prerequisites for negative expectations. The company expands its assortment, but relies on only one type of raw material - oats. There are two potential threats. First, there is always the risk that consumers will have a new favorite - greener, tastier, cheaper. Secondly, Oatly has more and more competitors in its own segment, and it is difficult to predict whether the audience will retain brand loyalty. And among the competitors are not only niche and relatively small firms like Oatly itself, but also the leading players in the dairy industry who do not want to miss the trend. In 2018, the American HP Hood introduced the Planet Oat brand, and a year later the French Danone followed suit and launched the Oat Yeah brand. “We see an opportunity and plan to be more assertive in this segment,” said Shane Grant, head of Danone North America. Competitive pressure can be dangerous for Oatly, as the company can't always keep up with demand for its products. In March 2021, the firm faced a shortage of production capacity, and as a result, disgruntled customers did not find their favorite products on supermarket shelves.

Still, most experts are optimistic. “We expect Oatly to grow over the long term, and this is just the beginning,” Lauren Grande of investment firm Guggenheim said in a statement. The Swedish brand does not even think of deviating from the intended course. In March, Oatly became a supplier to Starbucks and recently announced the introduction of oat milk cheese. The firm is building two new large factories, one in Pittsburgh, England, the other in Singapore. The latter is strategically important: Oatly intends to actively promote its products in Asia and, in particular, in China. And if she manages to conquer the East, then the alignment of forces in the segment of alternative milk may change radically.

**Authors:** *Elizaveta Anokhina, Arina Doynikova*