---
title: "Ghost Invasion: Why Applicants Disappear During the Hiring Process"
description: "Applicants agree on an interview and do not come, receive a job offer, but do not show up at the appointed time: guesting is a dangerous trend in the labor market. Fast Company tells what causes the phenomenon and how to deal with it"
date: 2022-06-12T07:23:46+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T07:23:46+08:00
images:
- XuLXE3L.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Pexels'
authors:
- Stephanie Vozza
interest: hr
channel: 
- career
- world business trends
tags: 
---

The phenomenon of ghosting is becoming more and more common in the professional world. According to Indeed.com research, in 2020, 28% of job seekers abruptly cut off contact with a potential employer without explanation. In 2019, this figure was 18%.

Hosting puts companies in a rather difficult position, given that the situation in the labor market is already difficult. According to a study by the HR platform CareerBuilder, more than 60% of recruiters consider the disappearance of candidates during the hiring process a problem for the company.

“In today's marketplace, candidates really have a lot of job options,” says Liz Cannata, Vice President of Human Resources for CareerBuilder. “And I think they have too high standards for what they expect from the recruiting process and the company itself.”

Why Applicants Disappear
------------------------

According to a CareerBuilder study, two-thirds of candidates suddenly disappear because they find a job with a higher salary or better conditions. This can happen even after they accept a job offer.

{{<ads>}}

“Often they continue to actively go to interviews in other places,” Kannata says. “It is very likely that they were offered more money or better terms.”

Another common reason for ghosting is poor communication. According to CareerBuilder, 51% of employees are frustrated by the lack of information. In addition, 38% say that companies keep them in the dark about what stage of consideration their candidacy is in, and 30% of job seekers complain that employers do not even acknowledge receipt of a resume.

“If a candidate doesn’t understand where his resume is and how long the process will take, he may lose interest and withdraw,” Kannata says. “Similarly, if the process is too long and seems to be drawn out, the applicant is assigned additional interviews or the company does not communicate the timing of the decision - all this also leads to the fact that the candidate disappears.”

The third reason for hosting employers is recruiters who don't describe the attractive side of their employer's offer well enough.

“Why is this a great place to work? What makes this company different from others? What are the features of corporate culture? Kannata explains. “These nuances are left out of the discussion of salary and benefits, but may influence someone's decision to join the company. The candidate may feel more connected to another company whose culture or mission is more in line with their values.”

What should companies do?
-------------------------

If you've experienced hosting more than once, it's a red flag that you need to rethink your hiring process. According to CareerBuilder, 35% of recruiters engage more with a job seeker between the offer and the job to reduce the risk of disappearing. Kannata recommends communicating regularly with applicants throughout the hiring process, even after the offer has already been made.

“This is a really critical period when you want a person to feel really interested and inspired,” the expert notes. “It’s helpful to have a manager on staff who interacts with and communicates with candidates on a regular basis.”

Also, take a step back and look at the company's hiring process itself. Ask yourself: is it really well established and effective?

“You have to make sure there are clear deadlines,” Cannata says. They must fit both sides. See how long it takes from the first contact with the applicant to when you actually make an offer. If the process is taking too long, especially in this market, find a way to speed it up.”

Make sure your pay and the benefits offered are up to market standards. Kannata recommends paying attention to other factors as well.

{{<ads>}}

“Salary and conditions are important, but job seekers also care about company culture, opportunities offered, work-life balance, DEI initiatives (Diversity, Equity & Inclusion - understanding and recognizing the uniqueness and individual differences of each, such as gender, race, age, socioeconomic status, physical characteristics, religious or political beliefs, etc.). Make sure recruiters and interviewers don't miss these points when asking why your company is a great place to work,” says Cannata.

In today's environment, recruiting needs to be creative and strategic, she adds.

“Even if it’s a different market and there are a lot of candidates, you should always try to set up a process so that people who didn’t even get a job leave with the idea that it was a really great experience,” Kannata concludes.

###### This material was first published in Fast Company magazine or at [https://www.fastcompany.com/](https://www.fastcompany.com/) . The original article can be read at the link. © 2021. All rights reserved. Material courtesy of Tribune Content Agency.

**Author:** *Stephanie Vozza*