---
title: "“Mysterious unicorn”: how the Chinese Shein changes the rules of fashion retail"
description: Within a few years, Chinese clothing manufacturer Shein has become one of the most dangerous rivals for Western mass-market brands. The secret of success is a business model that is not typical both for the industry and for the entire Chinese business
date: 2022-06-11T01:03:10+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T01:03:10+08:00
images:
- Xv8BP5I.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Pexels'
authors:
- Elizabeth Anokhina
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
- world business trends
tags: 
---

Zara founder Amancio Ortega started out selling bathrobes in Northern Spain. Erling Persson ran a women's clothing store in a small Swedish town for many years before H&M became a global brand. Xu Yang Tian had never been into fashion before launching Shein in 2008. The creator of one of the biggest fashion retail sensations of recent years was an SEO specialist.

Thanks to this experience, he understood how to attract the attention of Internet users. He introduced Western buyers to China's extremely popular "social commerce" format - online trading through social networks. All this, combined with a revolutionary approach to production, gave a stunning result.

According to Chinese investment firm Zheshang Securities, the company's gross turnover (GMV, a measure used in e-commerce to estimate the total sales volume across all sites) for 2019 amounted to $2.3 billion. It is expected that this year the indicator will overcome the $20 mark. billion. Analysts predict that in 2022, Shein's gross turnover will be larger than that of Zara. And in May, the retailer's mobile app became the most downloaded in America, overtaking Amazon.

Xu was also able to deal with the growing tension between China and Western countries. Shein is still a private company and extremely reluctant to share information about its achievements, however, apparently, no Chinese retailer has yet achieved such success in Western countries. America is Shein's key market, accounting for 35-40% of its GMV. The company receives another 30-35% from the developed countries of Europe. Among its investors are both large American venture funds (for example, Sequoia Capital) and Chinese ones (IDG Capital). All these features add up to a portrait of a new type of Chinese transnational corporation.

{{<ads>}}

Shein's recipe for success has three elements. The first is the fast-fashion model, only "accelerated" several times more compared to other players in the segment: the retailer's assortment is constantly updated, prices are extremely low even for the mass market. If Zara produces about 10 thousand new products a year, then Shein - about 6 thousand daily (including old models in new colors). Some items are quickly discontinued. Now on the platform you can find about 600 thousand different products. Prices range from $8 to $30, according to Smartkarma's Douglas Kim, comparable to Primark in the UK, which still relies on offline sales, and 30 to 50 percent less than Zara or H&M.

Shein manages to keep prices at this level thanks to smart logistics and production to order - an approach the retailer adopted from Chinese e-commerce giants such as Alibaba. It all starts with the development of clothing models. The design team searches the Internet for the latest trends and uses a special algorithm to determine which ones are the most popular. One of the employees said in an interview last year for one of the Chinese publications that he browses thousands of sites in search of ideas. This information is received by another team, which is already working on the design of each model. Things are sewn in small batches, about 100 copies, while the number of orders for one product on the site usually reaches several thousand.

Then new models go on sale at the same time, and Shein checks which ones are in the most demand (Alibaba works the same way). Since the retailer has no physical points of sale, and only digital channels are used to sell products, managers can monitor performance in real time. If the item is popular, then Shein immediately orders a new batch of goods. If buyers do not show much interest in it, then the position is removed from production. All products are stored in several large warehouses, from where they are immediately sent to customers, therefore, according to a company consultant, Shein's warehouse turnover does not exceed 30 days, while the average is about 150 days.

To simplify and speed up this process, Shein moved from Nanjing, located in the eastern part of China, to Guangzhou, a huge industrial city in the south of the country. Shein offers suppliers better contracts than its competitors. The company guarantees that it will redeem the entire batch and pay for the order within 14 days, while the standard term for the segment is 90 days. The only requirement on her part is a guarantee that the delivery will arrive on time. Chen Tengxi of Zheshang Securities says about 400 of Shein's 3,000 suppliers have agreed to the terms. With the help of special software developed by the retailer, manufacturers will know when to increase the production of a particular model of clothing.

{{<ads>}}

Technology has helped Shein not only improve its logistics, but also improve its sales approach and marketing strategy - this is the second element of success. In addition to donating its products to thousands of influencers, which has become a common practice today, the company has also invited several hundred local designers from America and other countries to cooperate. They come up with new clothes for Shein, and also show things and talk about the process of creating them on their social networks. The retailer plans to hire 3,000 more designers in 2022.

This strategy helped Shein gain an army of followers on Instagram (an organization recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation), TikTok and other platforms - in total there are already more than 250 million. About 70% buy Shein products in its mobile application, the number of daily users of which reaches 24 million. Every second shopper in the world who buys clothes and accessories online does so in the Shein app. The company's methods are so effective that it already has imitators. Los Angeles-based designer Gabby Lewis, who works with the retailer, says that as soon as Shein posted a video in which she advertised the company's products, competing brands immediately began asking her to participate in their commercials.

The third factor is the ability to stay away from political conflicts. Shein is not your typical Chinese company. For her, unlike other Chinese brands that tried to conquer the world, such as Huawei and Xiaomi, the home market does not play a big role. In the eyes of the West, this circumstance makes the retailer's already rather weak connection with China almost nominal. European and American shoppers are aware that Shein's low-quality clothing is made in Asia, as are most Western fashion retailers. But only a few know that this is a Chinese brand. It also helps that most orders from America are too small to be subject to duties imposed during the trade war between China and the US.

{{<ads>}}

In addition, Shein managed to avoid unnecessary attention from the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). This is partly due to the fact that selling dresses and trousers is a fairly harmless activity, unlike the development of chips or algorithms based on artificial intelligence. A minor presence in the Chinese market has also spared Shein the problems its key players (such as Alibaba and other e-commerce platforms) had to face when Xi Jinping decided to take control of "Chinese capitalism."

Despite its tremendous success, Xu's model is not without its weaknesses. Some of them are industry-wide. Like other fast-fashion retailers, Shein has come under fire for its high production waste and environmental impact. Many companies are also suspected of using cotton harvested from the plantations of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region in western China: the country's government is accused of exploiting the labor of local residents. Finally, the quality of Shein products leaves much to be desired, which, however, is not surprising at such low prices. One consultant points out that images comparing photos from the Shein website to photos of real-life products have already turned into memes and this has negatively affected the brand's reputation in Europe.

Another danger comes directly from the retailer's business model. Although Shein is now valued at $15 billion and is presumably preparing for an IPO, no one outside the company knows if it is making a profit. The firm's executives rarely give interviews and have never spoken to Western media. Chinese publications call Shein "China's most mysterious" unicorn ". Analysts rack their brains trying to calculate a firm's earnings and margins.

{{<ads>}}

Perhaps this is not such a big problem, especially in the short term. Investors continue to hunt for technology startups, and they are not very interested in profit. But one feature could be a serious threat to Shein in the long run. The company stores a huge amount of data of American buyers, it needs it to work. Because of this, she risks being in the same situation as TikTok. Last year, the ByteDance holding, which owns the social network, narrowly avoided being forced to sell the platform to American investors over fears that the confidential data of US citizens could end up in the hands of the CCP leadership (TikTok has repeatedly denied this accusation).

Like TikTok's competitors, Shein's Western rivals may also raise national security concerns to hinder its further growth. For a Chinese retailer, this would no doubt be a compliment, but with far-reaching implications.

**Translation:** *Elizabeth Anokhina*