---
title: "How a retailer for the “smart but poor” succeeds without an online store"
description: Americans love Trader Joe’s supermarkets, despite the inconvenient stores, accusations of racism, and a fundamental reluctance to master e-commerce. Why the success of the “old-fashioned” retailer was not hindered even by the pandemic
date: 2022-06-10T00:47:02+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-10T00:47:02+08:00
images:
- 0It5BTZ.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Cliff Hawkins/Getty Images'
authors:
- Elizaveta Anokhina
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
---

Trader Joe's, an American chain of stores, has as many dedicated fans as any pop star. So, on Instagram (the organization is recognized as extremist and banned in the territory of the Russian Federation), the Trader Joe's List account has 1.7 million subscribers, despite the fact that it is not the official page of the brand. “Back in stock! Almond Trio for $5.99! Almond becomes synonymous with Trader Joe's. Seriously, go to any online store and try to count all the products with almonds. From chocolate covered nuts to raw almonds and almond milk, there is an almond for every taste!” \- there are already more than 4 thousand such posts. There are also Trader Joe's Obsessed (540 thousand subscribers), Trader Joe's Food Reviews (424 thousand) and Trader Joe's Kitchen (344 thousand) accounts, not counting smaller communities, and all of them are formally not associated with the company. The network also has its own page on 2,

At the same time, Trader Joe's is a black sheep among American retailers. A significant part of the assortment consists of delicacies and rather specific products like truffle burrata (Italian soft cheese) and salted caramel flavored cocoa. Supermarkets can be found not in every region of the US, and in some states - only one or two. The network has practically no advertising, the stores are cramped, and, most surprisingly, the company does not even think about entering the e-commerce segment - for 2021, this is practically bad manners. This did not prevent it from recovering after the pandemic as soon as possible, and sales per square meter of Trader Joe's, according to various estimates (the company remains private and does not disclose its financial results), range from $1.5 thousand to $2 thousand, about three times more. than the average grocery retailer in the US. The secret of success is a thoughtful approach to the formation of the assortment and skillful work with the target audience.

{{<ads>}}

Cheerful and resourceful
------------------------

In 1958, recent Stanford graduate Joe Coulombe was working for Rexall Drugs in California, and was assigned to start a chain of convenience stores to try his hand at grocery retailing. This is how the first six stores called Pronto Markets appeared. After a couple of years, Rexall Drugs decided to liquidate the chain in order to concentrate on its core business. Coulombe, considering that the potential of the retailer has not been exhausted, simply bought it out.

By the mid-1960s, the entrepreneur already had 18 outlets in California. The company grew steadily and did not appear to be in serious trouble. But everything changed when a dangerous competitor, the Texas convenience store chain 7-Eleven, came to the “golden state”. What's more, the retailer has bought milk producer Adohr Milk Farms, which previously funded Pronto Markets. Soon the network was on the verge of bankruptcy. Coulombe recalled that he felt as if "an 800-pound gorilla had not only shown up in my city, but had eaten my source of capital." However, then the entrepreneur made two important discoveries for himself.

One day, a desperate farmer came to his office with a rather unexpected problem: he had too many premium chicken eggs left, but, since they cost more than usual, they were reluctant to buy. The surplus was too small for a large chain, so the farmer approached Coulombe and offered to sell them for the same price as the cheaper category eggs, which weighed 12% less. Coulombe agreed and immediately placed an advertisement for the action in all his stores. The success was overwhelming, sales of Pronto Markets skyrocketed - visitors who came for a great offer also took other goods at the same time. This helped the company stay afloat. But most importantly, Coulombe realized that the “low price plus limited supply” formula could turn an illiquid product into a sales driver.

{{<ads>}}

Around the same time, Coulombe stumbled upon two news items that interested him greatly. The first reported that the percentage of American adults with a college education had risen sharply due to the fact that in 1944 benefits for US military veterans entering universities were legislated. The second article was devoted to the development of the Boeing 747, which was supposed to enter service in 1970. The author argued that the new model would revolutionize the tourism industry and make traveling abroad much more accessible to the general population (and later turned out to be right). Coulombe thought about how this might affect consumer preferences. “Even at Pronto Markets, we noticed that people who travel have more courage in choosing products,” he wrote in his memoirs. These buyers were ready to try something new and unusual, for them the quality of goods played a big role. But often they turned out to be intellectuals who did not earn enough to often buy French wines and natural maple syrup, even if they could be found somewhere.

Coulombe realized that he could give them this opportunity: he had both a concept and a mechanism for its implementation. So he decided to open a new chain of supermarkets, which he named Trader Joe's. "Trader Joe's has become a \[shop\] for over-educated people who are underpaid, for classical music performers, museum curators, journalists, for this reason we have always been praised in the press!" the businessman said. He opened his first supermarket in 1967 in Pasadena. The city is still an important educational center in the United States today - it is home to the University of California, one of the most prestigious American universities (subsequently, Coulombe followed the same strategy and opened new outlets in places dominated by the population with higher education). America was experiencing a wave of craze for Polynesian culture, and the store was "themed": visitors were greeted by employees dressed in Hawaiian shirts, managers were called captains. Even the name was a reference to the Trader Vic's restaurant chain, which served the trendy tiki cocktails (long drinks based on rum with the addition of exotic ingredients).

Products hit the shelves that met four criteria - "high cost per cubic inch, high consumption rate, ease of preparation, \[Trader Joe's\] unique advantage in terms of assortment and cost." Since these were products that were not usually in high demand and Trader Joe's entered into contracts for large volumes of deliveries at once, suppliers agreed to sell goods on favorable terms. As a result, delicacies in the stores of the network were much cheaper than anywhere else. In addition, Coulombe looked for loopholes in the legislation, thanks to which he managed to diversify the assortment and, again, keep prices low. For example, he found that while the law protected local producers and prevented most foreign cheeses from being imported, for the French brie, there were no such restrictions, since it simply was not produced in the United States. Trader Joe's quickly became the country's largest importer of brie. Thanks to Coulombe's ingenuity, in Trader Joe's supermarkets, one could buy French wines (one of the chain's most popular products to this day), coffee beans, natural maple syrup, almond oil and other "exotic" products at very attractive prices.

{{<ads>}}

However, the stocks of many of these goods were limited, since, unlike any soda, they simply could not be produced in large volumes. “I realized this thanks to vintage wines,” Coulombe explained. “There are only a handful of 1966 Lafite Rothschild bottles.” And Coulombe was able to turn this deficit into an effective marketing tool. Buyers, knowing from experience about this feature, preferred to take such products immediately and not waste time thinking, otherwise they simply could not be in time.

Another important difference between Trader Joe's and other retailers was the personnel policy. Coulombe immediately stated that the average salary for a full-time employee should be equivalent to the median income of a California family. When the figure grew, so did salaries, and later their own rate was set for each state. Trader Joe's has helped greatly reduce employee turnover, which is a problem for most retailers. The entrepreneur said that the company was always ready to invest in personnel training, thanks to which the employees knew the assortment thoroughly and could always help.

In 1977, Trader Joe's launched its own brand, which, again, allowed the chain to sell more quality products at affordable prices. At the same time, the company decided to play with the names of products associated with the culinary traditions of a particular country: this is how Trader José (“Trader Jose”), Trader Giotto (“Trader Giotto”), Trader Joe San (“Trader Joe San ”), and before Thanksgiving you could find Pilgrim Joe labels (“Pilgrim Joe”).

Californians love Trader Joe's for its sense of humor, attentive staff, wide selection, and reasonable prices. But growth rates remained more than modest: by the end of the 1970s, the chain had only 26 outlets. Coulombe deliberately did not rush things. In his opinion, it was not worth sacrificing profits for the sake of expanding the business. The company has never attracted external capital and has developed exclusively at its own expense. High quality of service required significant costs, and it was impossible to find suitable suppliers who could serve a large network.

As you know, opposites attract. A small but thriving company interested Theodor Albrecht, founder and owner of the huge German discount chain Aldi. The entrepreneur bought the chain in 1979 as a family asset for an undisclosed amount. The new owner was guided by the principle “you don’t need to break what works anyway”: Coulombe remained the head of the company, the retailer’s strategy did not change, except that there were much more resources. “\[The Albrechts\] quickly concluded that Trader Joe's was a unique company,” Coulombe said. “All this time they have been wonderful owners. In fact, our sales agreement fit on one page. He served as CEO until 1988, after which he turned to consulting for other companies and wrote a memoir, published in early 2021.

{{<ads>}}

California Phenomenon
---------------------

Coulombe's departure from the company practically did not lead to significant changes; he still keeps the covenants of the founder of Trader Joe's. Only the approach to business scaling has changed: the financial situation allowed the company to grow more actively without fear that they would have to sacrifice quality or get into debt, while new technologies greatly simplified communication with employees and suppliers. New CEO John Shields ran Trader Joe's from 1988 to 2001, during which time the chain's retail outlets grew from 36 to 175, with sales from $2 billion to $132 billion. territories: in 1993, the first supermarket appeared in Arizona, two years later, Trader Joe's gained a foothold in the northwestern United States (Oregon, Washington and Idaho), and in 1996, the firm opened its first stores on the East Coast, in the Boston suburbs of Brookline and Cambridge. These cities were chosen for a reason, in Boston and next to it are several leading US universities, including Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

“In fact, there are no densely populated cities east \[from California\] to the Midwest, so we had to immediately make a “leap” to the East. Very few retailers have been able to do this and succeed, most of those who have tried have been wrong and seriously wrong,” Shields proudly declared. \- We conducted a serious study and found out that the "corridor" from Boston to Washington with a length of 500 miles (approximately 804 km.) is indeed the territory of Trader Joe's. There are more universities there than in any other region of the United States.” By 2007, the network already had 270 stores in 22 states. As of the end of 2021, Trader Joe's has 530 outlets in 42 states.

The company continued to develop its own brand (for example, in the early 2000s, the main “hits” of Trader Joe's appeared on sale - bananas at 19 cents apiece and wine at $ 1.99, which is of high quality for its value), now it accounts for 80% all products offered online. She also developed a special approach to the formation of her assortment. Trader Joe's supermarkets usually carry no more than 4,000 trade items, while the average for grocery chains reaches 50,000: Target, for example, offers about 70,000 items, and Kroger - 30,000. This greatly simplifies the selection process for the customer and increases the chances that he will buy more: according to a study by Columbia University professor Sheena Iyengar, a store visitor is more likely to buy expensive jam or chocolate,

{{<ads>}}

In addition, such a quantity of goods fits in a smaller area. Trader Joe's supermarkets are crowded compared to other retail outlets, and it's not just about saving on rent. “We want our stores to be small and cozy so that the customer feels like they are in a store located next door,” explained director of network development John Basalone on the Trader Joe's podcast. “Maybe you will run into someone you know or a store employee, talk about what you buy, how you are doing, something like that.” Trader Joe's employees even have a rule that they must talk to customers as they lead them to the right shelf. Handwritten price tags with tips on how to cook a particular product are also responsible for the feeling of “coziness”.

But perhaps the most unusual feature of the company's strategy is that it doesn't have an online store. The reluctance to create it has always been a fundamental position of Trader Joe's, which neither the pandemic nor the pleas of buyers forced to change. According to the company's management, there are two reasons for this. Firstly, the fashion chain wants to avoid associations with giants like Walmart and maintain the image of a “store around the corner”. Secondly, entering the online segment implies high costs, which the company considers inappropriate. “This requires months of planning and implementation, as well as huge resources,” said Matt Sloan, vice president of marketing for the network. "We at Trader Joe's would be better off spending the next couple of decades on our people than on the infrastructure we need to get rid of them."

The lack of its own delivery and online store did not prevent Trader Joe's from quickly recovering from the “quarantine” spring of 2020. According to the analytics firm Placer.ai, in April last year, traffic to the network's outlets decreased by about 44.4% compared to the same period in the previous year. In May, the gap was already 24.6%, in June - 12.1% and in July - only 3%. The company managed to improve its financial performance. According to the IGD analytical company, sales for 2020 reached $16.5 billion, in 2019 Edge by Ascential estimated the figure at $13.7 billion. And this despite the fact that during the pandemic a small area of ​​​​stores is more a minus than a plus for those who fear for the health of customers. An obstacle to a quick recovery should also have been the fact that at Trader Joe's, unlike large supermarkets like Walmart, Amazon and Target obviously won’t be able to buy everything they need at once (the one-stop-shop principle) - buyers were not inclined to go shopping, again due to security reasons. However, in August 2020, traffic increased by 1% compared to 2019. "Amazingly, \[Trader Joe's\] did it when other retailers like Whole Foods, who were hit, couldn't get through the downturn," Placer.ai's Ethan Chernofsky said. Indeed, traffic to the stores of the network, bought by Amazon in 2017, was 20% lower in October last year than in the same month in 2019. However, in August 2020, traffic increased by 1% compared to 2019. "Amazingly, \[Trader Joe's\] did it when other retailers like Whole Foods, who were hit, couldn't get through the downturn," Placer.ai's Ethan Chernofsky said. Indeed, traffic to the stores of the network, bought by Amazon in 2017, was 20% lower in October last year than in the same month in 2019. However, in August 2020, traffic increased by 1% compared to 2019. "Amazingly, \[Trader Joe's\] did it when other retailers like Whole Foods, who were hit, couldn't get through the downturn," Placer.ai's Ethan Chernofsky said. Indeed, traffic to the stores of the network, bought by Amazon in 2017, was 20% lower in October last year than in the same month in 2019.

{{<ads>}}

According to experts, the paradoxical success of Trader Joe's is due to the fact that it has succeeded more in building a loyal audience: high quality and a special atmosphere have done their job. Many shoppers are willing to turn a blind eye to the shortcomings of stores, such as small parking lots and long lines. These shortcomings have long become an integral part of the brand and an occasion for jokes on social networks. “Even through the pandemic, I will continue to go to Trader Joe's just because I love it. Yes, I put on a mask, and yes, I stand in line for 20 minutes… There is something calming about choosing between different types of Trader Joe's hot sauce, and I feel a rush of endorphins when I notice a new merchandise section while indie plays in the background -rock, similar to the soundtrack "500 days of summer," buyers write on the Web.

However, not everyone feels the "endorphin rush" when it comes to Trader Joe's. The network has been repeatedly criticized in recent years. Product names like Trader Jose and Arabian Joe have often led to accusations of racism and ethnic stereotyping, and last year the firm, which had long refused to change anything, said it was working on new names. There was also dissatisfaction with the fact that Trader Joe's uses too many unsustainable packaging materials. And in 2016, The New York Times reported that working conditions at the company are not as good as it is commonly believed: employees of the trading floors complained about excessive strictness on the part of managers, the lack of safe working conditions and the “atmosphere of surveillance”.

Reputational issues haven't hurt Trader Joe's so far. But the lack of ambition in online trading in the future can be a big barrier. According to the US Department of Commerce, in the third quarter of 2021, the share of e-commerce in total retail sales in the United States was 18.1% - slightly lower than the same period in 2020 (18.8%), but higher than before pandemic (the indicator for the third quarter of 2019 reached 15.2%). Every year, research firm Dunnhumby conducts a survey among US shoppers that builds the Consumer Preferences Index: Trader Joe's held onto the top spot in 2018 and 2019, but was swept to second place in 2020 by Texas-based supermarket chain HEB, and this year it was the leader Amazon - there is a reason to be wary. Moreover, the IT giant owns Whole Foods, its closest competitor, Trader Joe's, with a similar positioning, and Amazon Go, a chain of automated supermarkets. The latter, thanks to technology, has learned to do without cash desks and attendants, and analysts predict a great future for it. In addition, the potential risk for Trader Joe's is its geography. Of the chain's 530 stores, 184 (34.7%) are located in California, making it more vulnerable to competitors. The same Whole Foods in the US has 508 outlets in 44 states, but they are distributed more evenly - the company in the "golden state" also has the most supermarkets, but their share of the total is a much more modest 18%. Trader Joe's customers on the East Coast complain that new products arrive too late or don't arrive at all. and Amazon Go, a chain of automated supermarkets. The latter, thanks to technology, has learned to do without cash desks and attendants, and analysts predict a great future for it. In addition, the potential risk for Trader Joe's is its geography. Of the chain's 530 stores, 184 (34.7%) are located in California, making it more vulnerable to competitors. The same Whole Foods in the US has 508 outlets in 44 states, but they are distributed more evenly - the company in the "golden state" also has the most supermarkets, but their share of the total is a much more modest 18%. Trader Joe's customers on the East Coast complain that new products arrive too late or don't arrive at all. and Amazon Go, a chain of automated supermarkets. 

{{<ads>}}

The latter, thanks to technology, has learned to do without cash desks and attendants, and analysts predict a great future for it. In addition, the potential risk for Trader Joe's is its geography. Of the chain's 530 stores, 184 (34.7%) are located in California, making it more vulnerable to competitors. The same Whole Foods in the US has 508 outlets in 44 states, but they are distributed more evenly - the company in the "golden state" also has the most supermarkets, but their share of the total is a much more modest 18%. Trader Joe's customers on the East Coast complain that new products arrive too late or don't arrive at all. and analysts predict a great future for her. In addition, the potential risk for Trader Joe's is its geography. Of the chain's 530 stores, 184 (34.7%) are located in California, making it more vulnerable to competitors. The same Whole Foods in the US has 508 outlets in 44 states, but they are distributed more evenly - the company in the "golden state" also has the most supermarkets, but their share of the total is a much more modest 18%. Trader Joe's customers on the East Coast complain that new products arrive too late or don't arrive at all. and analysts predict a great future for her. In addition, the potential risk for Trader Joe's is its geography. Of the chain's 530 stores, 184 (34.7%) are located in California, making it more vulnerable to competitors. The same Whole Foods in the US has 508 outlets in 44 states, but they are distributed more evenly - the company in the "golden state" also has the most supermarkets, but their share of the total is a much more modest 18%. Trader Joe's customers on the East Coast complain that new products arrive too late or don't arrive at all. but they are distributed more evenly - the company in the "golden state" also has the most supermarkets, but their share of the total is a much more modest 18%. Trader Joe's customers on the East Coast complain that new products arrive too late or don't arrive at all. but they are distributed more evenly - the company in the "golden state" also has the most supermarkets, but their share of the total is a much more modest 18%. Trader Joe's customers on the East Coast complain that new products arrive too late or don't arrive at all.

Experts believe that the main thing for the network at the moment is to maintain charisma so as not to lose the sympathy of the audience. “Perhaps the best defense is to focus on what customers love about the brand; in other words, be more of a Trader Joe's,” wrote [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) in 2020. As long as there are petitions demanding to open a chain store in a particular city, we can assume that the company is coping with the task.

**Author:** *Elizaveta Anokhina*