---
title: "Intangible luxury: why brands benefit from the digital fashion market"
description: Fashion houses are investing more and more money in the creation of virtual clothes. Brands are integrating into online games, introducing 3D visualization into production and virtual fitting rooms
date: 2022-06-11T00:41:49+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T00:41:49+08:00
images:
- Wxjwg6X.jpg
caption: 'Photo: The Dematerialized / Instagram'
authors:
- Mark Ellwood
interest: management
channel: 
- world business trends
- business digitalization
tags: 
---

You can stay on the waiting list for a Birkin bag for years, but for some, the only cherished accessory is one they never get. British startup Dematerialised, which co-founder Karinna Nobbs calls "the digital store of your dreams," sells nothing but virtual luxury goods. This is a marketplace for clothes and accessories that will exist only on the Internet.

The first item presented on the site on December 12, 2020 was a silver sweater, which was sold for €121. The entire circulation (1.2 thousand digital images) was sold out in three hours, and other goods have been sold at the same speed on the marketplace since then. Nobbs has also worked with the Dutch virtual fashion house Fabricant, where users create exclusive clothing for their digital avatars on social platforms, including the 3D world of VRChat, which has exploded in popularity during the pandemic (a meeting place where you can create your own avatar, a unique world, play playing games, watching movies and just walking around like in real life). As part of cooperation with Fabricant, the most expensive deal so far took place on the site. For €9 thousand, one item of clothing was sold, which, strictly speaking, is not even an item.

Dematerialised works on a standard model popular in the street style segment (street fashion), releasing limited edition shoes, bags or other goods, usually no more than 150 pieces. Only one brand or computer-generated product is available for purchase at any one time.

After a successful transaction, buyers receive an NFT, or non-fungible token, which is a virtual certificate of ownership created on the basis of blockchain technology. With this authentication, the owner can showcase the bag or dress on VRChat, where tens of thousands of users interact daily through avatars, "flaunting" their outfits.

{{<ads>}}

Spending a lot of money on luxury items that cannot be touched or handled may seem silly. But gamers have long used clothes to express themselves online, just like people do in the real world. These outfits or skins, called "skins", are purchased by players to personalize their appearance in the online game. And the leaders of the fashion industry take this trend seriously, especially after the rebranding of the social network Facebook (the organization was recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) to Meta (the organization was recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) Platforms. The revamped company intends to focus in the future on creating a digital world simulation where users can interact as if they were in a real physical space. Suddenly it turned out that this niche has a lot of potential. In October, the head of the company, Mark Zuckerberg, announced the plans of Meta (an organization recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation), releasing a video in which he himself uses his own avatar and avatars of his colleagues to try on clothes, play cards, pay designers and even surf .

“Avatars will become as commonplace as a profile photo today, but unlike a static image, they will be three-dimensional projections of the user, his facial expressions and gestures,” Zuckerberg explained at the time. “You will have a wardrobe of virtual clothes for special occasions, designed by various authors, which can be “worn” in different applications.”

He further described how Meta (an organization declared extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) will help designers create clothes, home decor items and accessories that can be transferred from one platform to another, for example, from the Meta universe (an organization recognized as extremist and banned in the territory of the Russian Federation). RF) to the Halo game world (a series of games in the genre of combat fiction).

Choosing the name Meta (the organization is recognized as extremist and banned in the territory of the Russian Federation), the social network declared its claims in the galaxy of new opportunities. The Metaverse is a growing expanse of various virtual environments, including Roblox, a platform where players can create games and locations for others, and Fortnite, a multiplayer war game that recently got a deal with Ferrari. The head of Fortnite maker Epic Games, Tim Sweeney, spoke in November that the metaverse could become a multi-million dollar niche in the global economy.

Dematerialized is the first to storm new frontiers. In addition to VRChat, the store's goods will be available in competing virtual worlds based on the blockchain, such as Decentraland, Cryptovoxels and Somnium Space, where digital currencies are used and participants "own" a piece of "land" to store and sell items. Decentralized clothing can't be worn in Roblox or Fortnite yet. But, if all goes as Zuckerberg predicts, digital luxury will permeate those worlds as well. Brands such as Gucci, Balenciaga and Burberry already offer their products in both.

{{<ads>}}

Fashion is a priority
---------------------

No "old school" industry has penetrated the Metaverse like the fashion business. This contrasts strongly with what happened 20 years ago. Then brands simply ridiculed the Internet Web 1.0 (information was presented on static pages, simple resources prevailed on the Web: sites with ads, online store directories, thematic forums and personal pages). Even in 2008—three years after Amazon Prime launched—only a third of the luxury goods companies surveyed by Forrester Research were selling goods online. By that time, Prada hardly had a website.

In March 2016, shortly before the birth of many of these virtual worlds, Kerry Murphy co-founded The Fabricant, one of Nobbs' key partners. An expert in visual effects for film and commercials, he appointed Amber Jae Sluten as creative director. She became the first graduate of the Fashion Institute in Amsterdam, whose portfolio included only digital projects.

“She fought to ensure that there were no real items in the portfolio,” says Murphy. “She was spurred to this decision by the collapse of the eight-story Rana Plaza building in Bangladesh, which killed more than 1,100 people who worked in tailoring for the mass market.” After the tragedy, Sluten took a stand against the fashion industry of the real thing.

The Fabricant launched its first major project with luxury retailer IT Hong Kong, which hired the company to render real-life garments from almost 100 luxury brands in 3D. The retailer hoped to place the digitized outfits in the metaverse. But Murphy wanted Sluten to create her own designs that would embody her moral and creative mission. In early 2019, The Fabricant teamed up with Dapper Labs, a blockchain gaming company, to create its first virtual garment, a dress that was auctioned off at the New York Blockchain Ethereal Summit in May of the same of the year. The outfit was sold for the Ethereum cryptocurrency. The transaction amount was equivalent to $9.5 thousand (a similar amount of this cryptocurrency is now worth about $150 thousand. ) “We literally sold a JPEG file, an image with a smart contract on a USB stick that verifies \[the buyer’s\] ownership,” says Murphy, noting that, as part of the deal, Fabricant granted the right to process the product in Photoshop for three different images. The buyer gave the dress to his wife, who shared photos of herself “wearing” the outfit on social media.

{{<ads>}}

Murphy and his team have been working on these payments for the past two years. Fabricant now has its own platform, which is currently in beta testing. “Users can create their own digital outfits \[verified\] on the blockchain and wear those things in a lot of different games or make filters out of them on Snapchat,” says Murphy. “We are really focused on the creation economy, where everyone can become a digital clothing designer.”

If Armani lovers sell their looks to other users, Fabricant receives a 10% commission. At the initial stage, he invited only 50 authors, but later in December this opportunity will be provided to another 5 thousand people.

Incredible margin
-----------------

“Sewn off” virtual clothes brings almost 100% profit, since there is no need to purchase raw materials for production, and labor is involved to a minimum. (Sewing a haute couture garment takes days or even weeks, compared to a few minutes of setting up pre-programmed clothing patterns.)

Creating images in the metaverse also opens up enormous opportunities for creativity. In addition, garments can look whatever the designer wants. Gone are the constraints usually imposed only by market expediency or even gravity and logic.

Any company that has accumulated archives of diverse design examples for decades can turn this intellectual property into a new source of income by "re-release" things for use only in the metaverse. Non-existent brands can take on a new virtual life with minimal investment, like Elsa Schiaparelli's famous lobster dress or Halston's Jackie Kennedy pillbox hat.

Consultant Cathy Hackle is working on the idea of ​​"rebirth" of companies in the metaverse. Her experience of leading neophytes in virtual worlds has made her famous as the godmother of the metaverse.

“Not everything that is created in the metaverse has to be new. Companies can use their long history and traditions and present their legacy to new generations,” she says. “Nostalgia is a powerful feeling, and at the end of the day, creativity is creativity.”

{{<ads>}}

No discounts
------------

A conscious approach to resources will spur the development of the virtual luxury market, said Gonzalo Cruz, co-founder and CEO of PlatformE, a Portuguese company that helps traditional brands make 3D renderings of garments. The firm's clients ranged from large conglomerates Kering and LVMH to brands such as Gucci and Dior. Farfetch and Nordstrom also used PlatformE.

According to Cruz, fashion's move into the metaverse could solve the problem of overproduction that is hindering the growth of the industry. Such a problem appeared after the Second World War, when French designers created cheaper ready-to-wear collections to increase their profits. The emphasis on volume, according to Cruz, eventually led to the resource-draining fast fashion that dominates today.

“Every brand faces overproduction, excess inventory and, of course, stockpiles at the end of the season,” he says of the fashion industry in general. You start discounting and it's a never ending story. Today in stores 90% of things are sold at discount prices. It devalues ​​the brand."

Cruz believes that if shoppers are taught to start shopping with virtual items, all sorts of brands can almost completely eliminate end-of-season sales. Imagine a virtual fashion show - an army of digital Gigi Hadid walking down an imaginary catwalk, dressed in a variety of outfits. Consumers will order from the screens of their smartphones, and brands will be able to produce only what has already been sold, instead of flooding multiple Zara or Ralph Lauren stores with real items of clothing to try on. Avatars will have specific sizes, and they will be able to try on images that will then fit people in real life.

Or, if the outfit was only purchased for the avatar—like the virtual Gucci handbag, which sold more through the Mayfor platform than the same handbags in the real world—then those clothes might not have to be sewn at all.

Cruz is so passionate about the idea that PlatformE decided to go beyond Kering and launch their own label, Valaclava. The debut will take place online, the items will be created anonymously by artists and illustrators - some of them have been working in the fashion industry for a long time, others have little experience in this area.

The clothes shown on the virtual runway will be sold as NFTs and will become the property of the highest bidder (more like a patent). The buyer will not receive a real version of the garment, but if desired, he will be provided with all the technical information necessary for its manufacture. 300 other buyers will be able to buy the "real" non-NFT versions of the look, as some people are still addicted to that sort of thing.

{{<ads>}}

Bonus: earnings forever
-----------------------

There is another reason why luxury brands are so fond of NFT and virtual design: the secondary market and the resale market, so popularized by companies like RealReal and Fashionphile (the largest and most successful resale projects in the luxury segment). The introduction of the NFT allowed labels to finally monetize a market they had been trying to "hack" for a long time. NFTs guarantee authenticity, which discourages counterfeiting, and generates resale revenue for the company on every dress and bag.

“Usually if something is now sold \[on a resale site\], Hermès doesn't make a dime from it. But in the case of digital goods, there are huge opportunities for resale income,” explains Hackle.

All that is required is to include in the smart certificate or NFT a fee for royalties or a share of the revenue from future transactions. This guarantees the original producer a percentage of all funds paid. Fabricant already operates this way on its own platform, earning a 5% royalty each time a piece of clothing is resold after the first purchase.

End of real things
------------------

Virtual fashion is still a niche business. One of the biggest obstacles is not understanding how to wear what you have acquired. According to Zuckerberg, there are technological barriers between the metaverses. And we are still far from a world in which augmented reality glasses have become commonplace, also advertised in the presentation of Meta (an organization recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) (in this hypothetical world, virtual clothes can be worn on oneself to delight passers-by who wear such glasses).

But there is an entire generation of young people who have grown up playing video games in an environment where other users appreciate how they "look" and what they "have" in the virtual universe. For them, the idea of ​​investing in their digital appearance makes sense. Thus, while the flowering of some of these ideas may seem far off, their roots are already deep.

{{<ads>}}

In the future, “every fashion event will take place in the digital world,” predicts Gala Vrbanic, avid gamer and founder of Tribute Brand. The company sells digital wardrobe items that can be shared on social media. Simply put, we will wear comfortable clothes on the ground and show off our style in the virtual world.

According to Nobbs, her ultimate goal is to open a store with nothing but virtual clothing. “Marie Kondo has been talking about having too many things in our wardrobe for a long time, and we all know that,” notes Nobbs. “I think we will go to people who have a digital collection of clothes more than a physical one.”

Podium of the future
--------------------

The biggest brands are already making a name for themselves in the metaverse. For example, the fashion house Gucci created a virtual space inside Roblox, where the brand's clothes and accessories are displayed, and one bag was sold for real $4,000. Sportswear and footwear manufacturer Nike also announced a collaboration with Roblox to create the Nikeland virtual world. It will be organized along the lines of the company's headquarters in Oregon (there will be buildings, stadiums and sports arenas where players can compete in various games, and users will be able to dress their digital twins in the company's sneakers and clothes). In September, fashion house Balenciaga released a limited digital collection of clothes and items for the game Fortnite. These "skins", or wardrobes for certain playable characters, can be purchased with V-Bucks in-game currency (which, in turn, can be purchased with real money).

The venture arm of American premium clothing brand Tommy Hilfiger has announced a partnership with virtual marketing agency EWG Virtual. So the company will be able to focus on the so-called v-commerce (improving e-commerce with the help of visualization, virtual spaces and the ability to “test” the product before buying). To keep up with the competition, clothing, accessories and perfume maker Burberry has created a series of unique characters, the Sharky B Sharks. These are playable NFT creatures with jetpacks, armlets and flip flops that inhabit Blankos Block Party (multiplayer digital party game). vinyl toys.) from Mythical Games. The collection quickly sold out for nearly $400,000.

However, the “invasion” into the metaverse of the fashion house Dolce & Gabbana remains beyond comparison. In September, at the Alta Moda fashion show in Venice, the brand presented its debut collection of nine unique pieces of men's and women's clothing and accessories, also linked to the NFT. Four of the looks were virtual, the rest included real items of clothing. At auction, this futuristic collection was sold for $5.7 million.

**Author:** *Mark Ellwood*