---
title: "How the founder of Binance became the richest person in the world of cryptocurrencies"
description: A native of China, Changpeng Zhao built the world's largest cryptocurrency exchange. Despite the company's problems with regulators and even the ban on Binance in a number of countries, the fortune of the crypto entrepreneur may exceed the savings of Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos
date: 2022-01-23T00:36:33+08:00
lastmod: 2022-01-23T00:36:33+08:00
images:
- rjTYJJG.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Binance'
authors:
- Tom Maloney
- Yueqi Yang
- Ben Bartenstein
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
- crypto
tags: 
---

Princes, movie stars and world-famous athletes gather annually at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix (one of the stages of the Formula 1 World Championship.) on artificial Yas Island, located 30 minutes drive from the city center.

In December 2021, a new guest was noticed among the usual audience for this event - a former McDonald's hamburger vendor and software developer who literally overnight appeared on the list of the richest people in the world. We are talking about one of the first cryptocurrency innovators, Changpeng Zhao.

Zhao, known as CZ in the crypto community, is quickly becoming popular in the UAE. In Abu Dhabi, he is meeting with members of the royal family who want his Binance exchange to launch in the country, according to people familiar with the situation. The businessman rented an apartment in Dubai and arranges dinners near the tallest building in the world, the Burj Khalifa, and on the Palm Jumeirah. All this makes him the most prominent figure in the booming UAE cryptocurrency sector.

Zhao, 44, seems to have found his place in this wealthy region. According to the [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) Billionaires Index, the entrepreneur's net worth is $96 billion. [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) for the first time estimated Zhao's wealth, which exceeds the wealth of Asia's richest man, Mukesh Ambani. The billionaire can also take on tech titans like Mark Zuckerberg and Google founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin. Zhao's wealth could be significantly larger as the estimate does not take into account his personal crypto holdings, including bitcoin and Binance Coin (his own firm's tokens). The value of this coin, now called BNB, has risen by around 1300% in 2021.

{{<ads>}}

The success of Binance shows that there is a lot of money to be made in a crypto space that has no limits, even despite the recent market downturns.

At the same time, scandals erupted around the firm that Zhao founded in 2017. The work of Binance was banned in China, where it was created. In addition, regulators around the world check its activities. The U.S. Department of Justice and the IRS are investigating whether Zhao-controlled Binance is involved in money laundering and tax evasion, sources said. Representatives of the Department of Justice and the IRS declined to comment.

The future of Binance depends in part on whether the company can reach an agreement with global regulators and find a suitable location for its headquarters. Nevertheless, while the money in the company is flowing like a river. [According to Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) Fees and Volume Analysis[](http://www.bloomberg.com/), Binance's revenue in 2021 was at least $20 billion (the calculation took into account data from industry analysts Coingecko and Nomics on spot trading volume and transactions with cryptocurrency derivatives in dollars. The calculation did not include other sources of income for the company, such as margin lending, technology, consulting and non-fungible tokens (NFT)). That's nearly three times the $50 billion market cap Coinbase Global predicted. “Coinbase is perceived as an 800-pound giant in the US, but Binance is much bigger,” said Chris Brandler, an analyst at DA Davidson & Co.

Zhao declined to comment on the topic, and Binance challenged the accuracy of Bloomberg's estimates of the firm's market value and entrepreneur's [fortune](http://www.bloomberg.com/).

“The cryptocurrency market is still in the growth stage. It is characterized by high volatility. No matter how it is valued today, it may be valued differently tomorrow,” Binance said in a statement.

A month before F1 stars Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen met at the Yas Marina circuit, Zhao spoke at the [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) New Economy Forum in Singapore, where he revealed some of the numbers that show the company's skyrocketing growth.

According to him, not so long ago, the daily trading volume on Binance reached $170 billion. On a typical day, the figure is about $40 billion, although two years earlier it was only $10 billion. In the world of cryptocurrencies, these are huge numbers. The volume of trading on the exchange that Zhao founded often equals the combined volume of the four largest crypto exchanges following Binance.

[When Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/)'s Eric Shatzker asked the billionaire about his net worth during a November interview in Singapore, Zhao brushed it off. “I don’t care about wealth, money, ratings,” he said. A slender crypto-entrepreneur in rimless glasses and a striped tie added that such things distract from business and he is ready to give almost all his fortune before his death.

{{<ads>}}

Whether Zhao will be able to keep what he has earned remains to be seen. There are many reasons for an entrepreneur to be concerned about the prospects of their business. At the same time, Binance is now showing rapid growth. Proceedings against the company are conducted not only by the US Department of Justice and the Internal Revenue Service. Thus, the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) is investigating possible market manipulation and insider trading in the company. In addition, according to sources, the regulator is checking whether Binance allowed US customers to bypass laws to trade derivatives related to cryptocurrencies. The CFTC declined to comment.

In addition, consumers in a number of countries, including the UK, Japan, and Germany, have already been warned about the risk associated with Binance. At the end of December, the Canadian securities market regulator issued a reprimand to the company. Binance has allegedly informed users of the platform that it is allowed to continue operating in the country, although it does not have registration documents to do so.

According to a Binance spokesperson, the company “works with regulators around the world and takes compliance very seriously.” Zhao, in turn, said he was in favor of regulation and welcomed it. “I am not an anarchist,” he noted on a [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) forum . “I don’t believe that human civilization is advanced enough to live in a world without rules.”

The capitalization of the cryptocurrency market in early January soared to $2.09 trillion from $135 billion three years ago. Against this backdrop, the size of the fortune built on cryptocurrencies is rapidly growing.

Until recently, crypto-entrepreneurs rarely made it into the rankings of the world's billionaires. However, the number is now on the rise as more companies in the industry are raising venture capital funding or going public. This makes it easier to evaluate the value of their business.

Exchanges such as Coinbase, Gemini, FTX, and Kraken have been highly acclaimed in the markets. Binance is popular, it has a lot of products, and this can attract investors.

At the same time, the cryptocurrency market is volatile. Bitcoin has fallen in price by more than 11% in 2022. It is currently worth around $41,000. This is well below the $69,000 high that the coin reached in November 2021. Shares of the Coinbase exchange have fallen in price by about 35% over the past two months.

{{<ads>}}

Some crypto companies have faced complaints from regulators. In this sense, the history of the once largest crypto derivatives exchange BitMex is instructive. In August 2021, she paid $100 million as a result of the CFTC and the US Financial Crimes Enforcement Service. Regulators found that BitMex allowed illegal derivatives trading and violated anti-money laundering laws. The company neither admitted nor denied the allegations. Its founders Arthur Hayes, Samuel Reid and Ben Delo are awaiting trial. Prior to that, they had already had to deny accusations of violating the law on bank secrecy.

Zhao owns a 90% stake in Binance. This conclusion is based on the businessman's public statements and company filings with regulatory authorities in jurisdictions where such information is subject to disclosure. Zhao told [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) in a November interview that Binance generates revenue from hundreds of crypto tokens that the company does not convert into fiat currencies. “We just keep them,” he said at the time. “If you calculate the indicator now, it will be one number, and in five minutes it will be another, because all prices change.”

Zhao is now a Canadian citizen. But he was born in the Chinese province of Jiangsu. His father, a university professor, was sent to the countryside during the Cultural Revolution. And when Zhao was 12 years old, his family moved to Vancouver. Zhao became interested in technology at an early age, then studied computer science, worked in finance in Tokyo and New York, including four years at [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) LP (the parent company of [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) News).

He started his journey in the field of cryptocurrencies in 2013 in Shanghai. During a friendly poker game, then-CEO of BTC China exchange Bobby Li and investor Ron Cao recommended that Zhao invest 10% of his savings in bitcoin. After studying their offer, the businessman took a decisive step - he sold his apartment for bitcoins. In 2017, he founded the Binance exchange (the name is created from the words binary and finance - “binary” and “finance”), which quickly took center stage in cryptocurrency trading. Zhao even got the company logo tattooed on his arm.

Binance has become the main trading platform for altcoins. These are less liquid cryptocurrencies compared to common tokens like Bitcoin and Ethereum. Altcoins have become one of the most speculative assets. More than 350 types of altcoins are traded on the Binance international exchange. According to Binance, this is almost twice as much as on the Coinbase exchange.

{{<ads>}}

According to Tim Swanson, head of market analytics at London-based blockchain company Clearmatics, Binance has been able to achieve "user acceptance" in part because the company allows customers to use Binance Coin to lower fees. “This exchange doesn’t even need to be the first to list a coin anymore to attract liquidity,” Swanson said of Binance. In addition, Zhao's firm is the largest in terms of derivatives trading volume. This means that its users can work with more risky crypto-currency assets, receiving a higher income.

Initially, only an email address was required to open an account with Binance. The exchange focused on transactions with cryptocurrencies and limited interaction with traditional banks and regulators. In August, the company announced that all new users were required to verify their identity, and existing users who failed to do so would be restricted from withdrawing funds.

The company has never had an official headquarters. Binance was founded in China, after the ban on work in the country, the exchange moved to Japan, and then to Malta. Malta's financial regulator subsequently denied that it oversaw the operation of the exchange. Although Binance is active in Singapore, in December, the local division withdrew its application to open an exchange.

As Zhao said during a November interview, Binance is now trying to decide on a location for the headquarters, adding that it will announce the news "soon." This directly contradicts what the company has been saying in 2020. Then Zhao said that the headquarters of the company is where he is. Legal documents show that Binance is registered in the Cayman Islands, which is known as an offshore tax haven. Due to the ability of Binance to operate almost anywhere, it is difficult for regulators to understand which jurisdiction to classify the firm.

“The company's approach was as follows: we do not need a regulator, we are decentralized. This has fueled growth, scale and innovation,” said Chris Brandler. However, Zhao may have to change his approach to Binance's freedom as the firm is interested in raising funds from outside investors. And for investors, the fact that a company complies with the requirements of regulators may indicate that the business is legally stable.

Zhao is trying to find a favorable regulatory regime for the company, people familiar with the situation said. Senior positions at Binance are held by former UAE regulators. In addition, the company has signed an agreement with the Dubai World Trade Center to collaborate on the development of a regulatory framework for cryptocurrencies.

{{<ads>}}

However, not all attempts by Binance to ingratiate themselves with regulators go smoothly. In 2021, Binance.US, a trading firm associated with the company, appointed a former acting Comptroller of the U.S. Currency as CEO. His appointment was seen as a positive step towards solving problems with regulators. However, the top manager lasted only three months in his post and resigned in August, citing disagreements over the company's strategy.

Despite all these difficulties, investors may be tempted to try their luck with the most successful cryptocurrency exchange in the world. At the end of 2021, Binance was trying to raise money from sovereign funds, and its US subsidiary was looking for investors to conduct an initial public offering (IPO). In November, the Wall Street Journal reported that former executives valued Binance at $300 billion.

“We believe that in order to raise capital, Binance needs to show that it is committed to establishing a global headquarters and consolidating operations,” said Pitchbook analyst Robert Le.

If Binance succeeds, then Zhao's fortune may exceed the capital of the richest man in the world, Elon Musk and the second in the list of billionaires, Jeff Bezos.

As Zhao said in an interview in November, he admires the founder of Amazon. “I don't know him personally. But I would like to get to know him in the future,” Zhao said.

**Author:** *Tom Maloney, Yueqi Yang, Ben Bartenstein*
