---
title: "How the Zune was made: the story of Microsoft's worst product"
description: 'In 2006, Microsoft introduced its first audio player, the Zune, in an effort to out-compete Apple, whose iPod dominated the market. However, hopes did not materialize: Microsoft chose the wrong moment to launch, but this was not the only reason'
date: 2022-06-08T23:45:12+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T23:45:12+08:00
images:
- 5VCcZc5.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images'
authors:
- Elizaveta Anokhina
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
---

Today, Microsoft is the embodiment of corporate prosperity: the Windows operating system remains the most popular in the world, after the start of the pandemic, the Microsoft Office software package has become even more in demand, as well as Azure cloud services - the company is one of the leading players in this market. Stocks are steadily rising, management gurus sing the praises of the company's CEO Satya Nadella, and the wrath of the public and regulators the company incurs much less often than other Big Five IT giants.

However, nine years ago, analysts unanimously insisted that the “golden days” of Microsoft are in the past, and vied with each other calling for the dismissal of Steve Ballmer, the closest associate of Bill Gates, who led the corporation from 2001 to 2014. Indeed, that period in the history of the company was not distinguished by successful launches (not counting Microsoft Office and the Xbox game console, work on which began under Gates), but it was rich in mistakes, unsuccessful attempts to enter new markets and compete with Apple. And, perhaps, the most grandiose of all was the failure of the Zune MP3 player, produced from 2006 to 2012.

Same but different
------------------

The confrontation between Apple and Microsoft lasts about as long as the companies themselves exist. And in the 2000s, the first was clearly in the lead - largely due to the iPod, which revolutionized the MP3 player market in 2001: the device captivated buyers with its compact size, user-friendly interface and beautiful minimalistic design. Popularity was also facilitated by the appearance of the iTunes Store two years later - by October 2003, Apple had sold 1.3 million devices and occupied 31% of the MP3 player market.

{{<ads>}}

Microsoft, on the other hand, concentrated on its main source of income and continued to make software for desktop computers, as if ignoring the development of mobile devices. Ballmer [rejected](https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-24178512) any initiative that did not concern the most profitable areas of the company. Yet the unexpected success of Apple and the lack of significant achievements in "their" segment forced the company's management to think about diversification. The company decided to "attack" the opponent on his own field and release his own MP3 player, more advanced from a technical point of view and therefore, as expected, more attractive to buyers.

The Microsoft device was created jointly with the Japanese Toshiba, which took over the production tasks. The project was codenamed "Argo", while work was underway on "Alexandria" - a platform that was supposed to become an analogue of the iTunes Store (a similar service, MSN Music, Microsoft launched back in 2004 as part of the MSN messenger, but it did not win the love of users) . As a result, the products were named Zune and Zune Marketplace. Buyers and experts were looking forward to the new player and actively discussed the upcoming release. Microsoft fueled interest with the help of a large-scale marketing campaign: it launched a special website and held events dedicated to Zune, actively advertised the player both offline and online.

In its promotional strategy, the company placed emphasis on opposing its product to the iPod. So, in [the commercial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AFimVbEuYsM&ab_channel=KillahManjaro), all the features and capabilities that the Apple device did not have, but that the Zune had were listed. One of the main technical advantages of the player from Microsoft was the ability to wirelessly connect to a PC and share audio files and images between two devices using Wi-Fi. Zune also allowed you to listen to the radio, communicate with other device owners using the Zune Social platform. The player's screen was larger than that of the iPod, and video playback was more convenient.

Opinions were divided. Some reviewers [believed](https://macdailynews.com/2006/07/10/enderle_on_what_it_would_take_for_microsoft_to_kill_apples_ipod/?_ga=2.129924232.585246327.1643016997-1728433266.1642497666) that the company that created Windows and Xbox should come up with something amazing this time around. They called the Zune nothing more than an "iPod killer" and said that Microsoft's new product would do to the market leader "what Windows computers did to the Apple Mac." Others ridiculed the company. Skeptics noted that outwardly the device looks like both an iPod (the same rectangular shape and a large round control button under the screen) and a Toshiba Gigabeat. Technical specifications were also related to the latest Zune, although Microsoft claimed that the Japanese company did not participate in the development of the product concept: critics considered that Zune is just Toshiba in a new “wrapper”. The design of the player also caused bewilderment: Microsoft promised to release the device in several colors, including the not-so-obvious brown. "The future is bright the future is brown? BROWN? —[asked](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2006/sep/14/microsoftannou2) The Guardian. And in general, the intention to oust Apple, which had been the leader in the segment for five years, looked too ambitious. “I'm not an iPod fan and certainly not a Microsoft fan, but I'm a little intrigued by how it can push Apple into the MP3 player market. And I'm even more interested in how a multibillion-dollar corporation like Microsoft is going to spend money to win over iPod owners, ”such [was](https://www.neowin.net/forum/topic/480842-microsoft-zune-viral-marketing-website/) the mood on the forums.

{{<ads>}}

The first model, the Zune 30, hit the shelves on November 14, 2006. And the start was not the most successful. According to research firm NPD Group, Microsoft's share of US MP3 player sales for December 2006 was 2.8%, despite the fact that it was the holiday season and the product tends to be the best-selling product. in the first weeks, when the excitement around him is still great. A similar figure for the iPod reached a new record - 72%. Moreover, in the fourth quarter of 2006, Apple's revenue from music devices and services was $4.1 billion, with a combined figure of $7.1 billion. At the same time, Microsoft's Zune and other devices division [reported](https://macdailynews.com/2007/01/26/last_quarter_microsoft_lost_289_million_on_zune_ce_devices/) a loss of $289 million. But even then the results were not encouraging. According to [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) Television, from launch to mid-2007, 1.2 million Zune players were sold. Apple sold 21 million players in the first quarter of 2007 alone.

In addition, in January of the same year, Apple announced the release of its first smartphone. Microsoft did not take the news seriously. When asked during an interview what he thought about the upcoming iPhone launch, Steve Ballmer laughed and replied that a $500 phone without a QWERTY keyboard would never sell well. But, as you know, the top manager turned out to be wrong: in 2007, Apple sold almost 1.4 million iPhones worldwide and, in fact, made a new revolution, already in the mobile phone market. With the advent of smartphones, there is virtually no need to buy a separate MP3 player. Microsoft didn't even think about it.

In November of the same year, the company released the second-generation Zune players, cheaper and with less memory - 4 GB and 8 GB, as well as an improved Zune 80 model with 80 GB, respectively. But after the release of the iPhone, the release went almost unnoticed, and Microsoft failed to radically change the situation in the MP3 player market. The company's share was 3%, and it was inferior not only to Apple, but also to SanDisk and Creative. By May 2008, Microsoft had [sold](https://venturebeat.com/2008/05/09/microsoft-surpasses-2-million-zunes-sold-apple-sells-265-million-ipods-a-month/) 2 million units since launch. Apple sold 3.53 million players a month.

In the fall, the company added the Zune 16 and Zune 120 devices with Internet search to its lineup, but financial results for the fourth quarter of 2008 turned out to be deplorable: sales fell by 54% compared to the same period the previous year. The media [joked](https://www.nbcnews.com/id/wbna28619965) that Microsoft does not help even the fact that Zune enjoys Barack Obama. Even the player's mad fan, who got three tattoos with his logo and is known on the Internet as Mszunefan, declared that he had had enough and bought an iPod. The Zune HD, released in 2009 (at the same time, by the way, Samsung released the first smartphone from the Galaxy line), was supposed to save the situation, the first player in the line with a touchscreen and an updated design. But Microsoft's share of the player market has shrunk to 2%. The company, apparently, already well understood that Zune had no future - new models did not come out anymore. Officially, Microsoft announced the end of production of the player in 2011, and a year later the Zune Marketplace was relaunched as Xbox Music.

{{<ads>}}

Senseless Chase
---------------

Lack of time was perhaps the main reason for the failure of the Zune: the idea of ​​​​entering the market five years after the introduction of the iPod seemed crazy to most from the outset. “The portable music market is in the past, and its heyday was already over by the time we started developing \[Zune\],” Robbie Bach, a former top manager at Microsoft, later noted. “Honestly, we just didn't have the guts and ended up catching up with Apple with a product that, while not bad, was still catching up. But it is not at all necessary to be a pioneer in a niche in order to take a leadership position or at least create a truly competitive product - Facebook (an organization recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) was not the first social network, and the same Samsung Galaxy was not the first smartphone.

First, the functional difference between the Zune and the iPod is hardly a significant advantage. The screen of the player from Microsoft was indeed a little larger, but the case also became larger and thicker because of this. This affected the ease of use and visual appeal of the device. The company placed particular emphasis on the ability to share songs with other Zune owners, but in practice the function turned out to be practically useless: no more than three audio files per day could be sent from device to device, each of which was available for listening for only three days. In addition, additional functions "ate" the battery power. Finally, the Zune Pass subscription service, which allowed users to download an unlimited number of songs from the Zune Marketplace, proved too advanced for its time: the business model was too unfamiliar for the audience, and people weren't willing to give away an extra $14.99 at the height of the 2008 global financial crisis. Designer Tony Sherba, head of the Yeti studio, noted that, most likely, Microsoft did not pay due attention to studying the needs of the audience. “If Microsoft had done this, they would have realized already at the development stage that customers would not appreciate the capabilities of the Zune. The company assumed that this would be the case, and this was its mistake, ”he explained. that buyers will not appreciate the capabilities of the Zune. The company assumed that this would be the case, and this was its mistake, ”he explained. that buyers will not appreciate the capabilities of the Zune. The company assumed that this would be the case, and this was its mistake, ”he explained.

{{<ads>}}

Second, the Zune was too expensive. The first model, the Zune 30, cost $249.95. The same amount as the improved version of the fifth generation iPod with the same amount of memory introduced a month earlier. It turned out that Microsoft was targeting a competitor's audience, but iPod owners saw no point in switching to another product. As a result, Zune increased its market share due to the few owners of cheaper devices who were willing to pay extra for a more advanced and functional device. The problem was that most of the more budget-friendly competitors were licensed by Microsoft's PlaysForSure, which confirmed that the device was compatible with Windows music formats. Thus, the company "killed" its own product with the help of Zune and spoiled relations with other market players.

Finally, the promotion strategy also turned out to be not the most successful. Advertising for the iPod has always been minimalistic and rather restrained, with Apple focusing on the player's convenience in everyday life and its elegant, versatile design. Microsoft went the other way. Zune's commercials were creative, colorful, and short-film-like, and the company hired well-known artists and animators to collaborate. The color scheme was often contrasting - black, purple, orange predominated. Zune was positioned as a player for young, creative, energetic people who appreciate good sound and high-quality "picture" - Microsoft, in fact, worked with a "niche" audience. “We did really trendy and creative ads that appealed to a narrow segment of the music market, and we failed to interest a wide audience of listeners, ”Bach admitted. The company also spoke in its advertising campaigns about music as a means of communication, about something that unites people and helps to find like-minded people. “Welcome to the community” was the slogan of the product. This message can hardly be called universal: players are bought not only by music lovers, moreover, the musical tastes of the interlocutor are far from being important to everyone.

Still, the main problem was probably not with Zune per se, but with Microsoft's strategy as a whole. The company failed to enter the mobile device market before Apple and become a leader. And instead of looking for new directions, becoming a leading player in new segments, she began to try to catch up. Business consultant Simon Sinek recalled that he once came to the summit, where he spoke first for Microsoft and then for Apple. “Most of the directors of Microsoft devoted their presentations to the same topic: how to become Apple. And Apple CEOs devoted their presentations to a completely different thing: how to help employees teach and learn, ”he said. Another three years have passed since the Zune was discontinued, Microsoft released several more failed products (including the Windows 8 and Windows Mobile operating systems),

**Author:** *Elizaveta Anokhina*
