---
title: "Original Script: Explaining Apple's Video Streaming Ambitions"
description: Apple is rapidly expanding its presence in the streaming services market. However, unlike Netflix and other competitors, the tech giant has a much smarter plan to exploit its position in the music and video content market.
date: 2022-06-11T00:31:04+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T00:31:04+08:00
images:
- qQUMH4M.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Kartikey Das / Pexels'
authors:
- Kira Galkina
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
---

The famous American comedian John Stewart posted a video on Twitter in September 2021, in which he was ironic about the Apple streaming platform. “Every year, thousands of hours of high-quality content go unwatched because good, hard-working people… don’t know how to find Apple TV+,” Stewart lamented with mock seriousness, to the mournful violin melody in the background.  
  
The most valuable company in the world is easy to joke about them. In 2021, the tech giant's revenue was $366 billion, up a third from a year earlier. The market value of the company broke through the $3 trillion mark on January 3, 2022 (then there was a rollback). The billions that Apple is investing in the media content industry, including Stewart's new TV show, are peanuts for the Silicon Valley titan.

However, 300 miles (480 km) down the coast, in Hollywood, where they habitually chuckle at amateurs from the big tech industry from the north, Apple's attempts to gain a foothold in the media market are no longer funny. While still lagging far behind the world's largest streaming service, Netflix and its ilk, Apple has enough cash to survive costly "streaming wars" that could bankrupt other players. One question prevents competitors from sleeping at night: what does the manufacturer of premium smartphones and tablets want to achieve by being so active in the show business market?

{{<ads>}}

Exactly 21 years ago, Apple made a splash in the music industry with the introduction of the iTunes app. The company got a stake in the song sales business, and people bought millions of iPods to listen to those songs. Later, movies began to be sold on iTunes. Apple hoped that this scheme would also work in the TV broadcasting market, which is an order of magnitude larger. However, the pay-per-download model has been superseded by the all-inclusive subscription, pioneered by streaming audio services Spotify (in music) and Netflix (in streaming video).  
  
Subscriptions, unlike downloaded music or movies, can be easily transferred from one device to another. Finding no way to increase user dependency on individual devices, Apple decided to wait out the streaming revolution on the bench.

Today, the company is back in the game and has far more influence than Stewart's joke suggests. For example, music streaming service Apple Music, which appeared in 2015, is now the second largest after Spotify. The Apple TV+ streaming service has only been on the market for two years, but is already the fourth-largest video service in terms of subscribers outside of China, according to analytics and consulting firm Omdia. Over the past two years, Apple has launched several other smaller media projects. These include the Apple Arcade subscription gaming service, the News+ news and periodicals platform, and Fitness+, a fitness service that offers workout and meditation video tutorials. There are rumors in the market that later in 2022 the corporation's collection will be replenished with an audiobook listening platform.

Apple, like another technology media giant, the world's largest e-commerce platform Amazon, has been able to quickly bring its products to the markets of different countries. She overtook Hollywood competitors who had to establish online broadcasting from scratch. The corporation can afford to give away free trials generously. Omdia estimates that less than a third of Apple TV+ viewers pay for a subscription.

Apple boasts a number of highly successful projects. So, the series about the coach of the American football team “Ted Lasso” received several Emmy awards last September. But the service does not have a content archive, and this leads to a significant outflow of customers. Smaller competitors such as Paramount+ (part of the Viacom CBS conglomerate) and Peacock (a service owned by NBCUniversal) have few new projects, but they have libraries that have been growing for decades.

{{<ads>}}

Old-time media companies have been taken aback by Apple's sudden, sometimes seemingly frivolous, incursions into their turf. Winning the streaming market depends largely on content spending. But wealthy Apple spent just over $2 billion on film and TV in 2021, compared to $9 billion from Amazon and $14 billion from Netflix, according to research firm Ampere Analysis. At the same time, the corporation does not advertise its projects too much. And while there is talk in the media world about executives being lured to Apple (Jamie Erlicht and Zach Van Amburgh at Sony and Richard Plepler at HBO), insiders in Silicon Valley are talking about the iPhone maker keeping its top tech talent on other projects.

While Hollywood is worried about Apple's next move, many in Silicon Valley are wondering why the company even entered the media content market. None of the segments of this industry is of great value to the world's largest capitalization firm. So, in 2020, sales in the entire global recording industry amounted to $ 22 billion, which is less than the corporation earned only on the sale of the iPad. Apple's monthly sales are comparable to Netflix's for a full year.

Apple's streaming business is based more on buying TV shows than renting someone else's content, as it was in the days of iTunes (and still happens in the app store). And users are not "locked" to devices, as Apple's core media services are available on any platform.

Apple's renewed interest in the media field is due to a change in the size of the company and a radical reassessment of what side projects can be profitable. 15 years ago, when Netflix first started streaming, the billions invested in launching a movie studio would be comparable to a solid share of Apple's annual revenue. According to Benedict Evans, a technical analyst and former venture capitalist, in those days, Silicon Valley executives would fly to Los Angeles thinking, “We have a fat checkbook, we can go and buy a lot of content.” “They would go to their first meeting in Los Angeles and people from Los Angeles would name them a price,” he says. After that, representatives of the technology company would go home. In 2021, the estimated budget for Apple TV+ content was 0.6% of the company's revenue.

Thus, the cost of running a streaming platform for Apple is relatively negligible. This may seem like the only small benefit. Users are not as tied to streaming subscriptions as they are to iTunes purchases. However, the various services offered by Apple still serve as a kind of bait for customers. They force people to spend more time with their devices, and abandoning the Apple ecosystem is simply inconvenient, says Nick Lightle, former chief executive of Spotify. Evans believes that iPhone sales, which generated $192 billion in revenue in 2021 (more than half of Apple's total revenue), also use a subscription model to some extent. Anything Apple can do to prevent even a small decline in iPhone ownership will pay off in itself.

{{<ads>}}

Media content works for the corporation as a good marketing tool. Production of films in collaboration with Steven Spielberg and Tom Hanks once again confirms the premium brand of Apple. Thanks to partnerships with pop stars, the company has a modern look. While Silicon Valley companies are being attacked for monopoly, invasion of privacy, undermining democracy and more, Apple is producing podcasts by Pakistani human rights activist and Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai and teaching fitness to kids. Few companies can treat their film studio as a public relations department. But a $3 trillion corporation can afford it.

"Apple doesn't play the games of its competitors \[in the media business\]," said Julia Alexander of Parrot Analytics. For companies with which the giant corporation competes in only one area, such as Netflix, this turns into an unpleasant unequal competition. But Apple has ambitious priorities in other areas. And they can interfere with its success in the media market. The lack of a content library on Apple TV + is not a problem if you can buy someone else's. The corporation was considered a potential buyer of both small studios like Lionsgate and giants like Disney. But Apple may not want to draw the attention of the US Federal Trade Commission, which is interested in what is happening in Silicon Valley.

"If you're Apple and the FTC is eyeing high-tech companies, the last thing you want to do is make a big purchase," says Julia Alexander. Commission chair and chief big tech critic Lina Khan is currently looking into Amazon's recent $8.5 billion acquisition of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), a relatively small asset in a fragmented market.

{{<ads>}}

Companies are fighting for leadership in conquering new technological heights in various fields, ranging from Web3 (a new concept of the Internet network, which implies decentralization. - _RBC Pro_ ) and ending with the world of virtual reality. And in these conditions, you should not attract the attention of regulators and buy old seasons of TV shows or TV shows.  
  
Apple will continue to invest in its media services as long as they are useful in promoting the company's products and positioning the brand. This could prove costly: according to Ampere, global video content spending will exceed $230 billion in 2022, nearly double what it was a decade ago. As smaller competitors go bankrupt and give up, Apple may even strengthen its position. But, given the company's big ambitions in other industries, in the media market, Apple is likely to be limited to a supporting role.

###### © 2021. The Economist Newspaper Limited. All rights reserved. The Economist material is translated by RBC Pro and published under a license agreement. The original article in English is available at [www.economist.com.](https://www.economist.com)

**Author:** *Kira Galkina*