---
title: "How to return to a resourceful state: five practices and five steps"
description: Along with EQ and IQ, leaders are paying more and more attention to VQ - vitality. They learn to manage their own state despite the incessant turbulence. Olga Kasyan (Smart Motion communication group) gives five practices that will help with this
date: 2022-06-11T13:49:30+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T13:49:30+08:00
images:
- aKV4pBj.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Keira Burton/Pexels'
authors:
- Olga Kasyan
interest: Health
channel:
- mindfulness
- instructions 
tags: 
---

I have been studying the issue of human vitality and VQ (Vitality Quotient) for a long time and I know that the ability to manage one’s own resource is no less important for a happy life and effective work than the ability to manage emotions and develop intellect.

Every person has a hidden superpower that we do not always use, but which can lead us to incredible achievements. This superpower is the ability to keep an internal focus on what is important: not allowing negative thoughts, not wasting time on useless things and toxic people.

Do a little warm-up exercise. Think back to the last time you were angry at someone and think about how you feel about it now. Most likely, over time, the passions subsided, and you are no longer as sensitive to the situation as then. Now try to remember the person who caused your anger, in detail. Put your focus on the details. What do you feel now? Probably, the anger began to intensify, because you gave him fuel - the “engine” started.

Now do the opposite. Think of a person to whom you are grateful. Remember in colors what exactly. Has your gratitude increased? This is how it always works.

This is the base, without which the tools that will be offered below will be useless. Instead of debilitating thoughts “How tired I am and I don’t want anything,” give energy to diametrically opposed ideas. For example, "How do I know what I really want?" or “How do I want something for real”?

Before moving on to a direct acquaintance with the practices, rate from 1 to 10 the level of your energy now and remember this figure.

{{<ads>}}

Top 5 practices that will help you quickly replenish the resource
-----------------------------------------------------------------

**1\. Practice "My Morning"**

How does the average person's morning start? After five or six alarm clocks for later, a person jumps out of bed, grabs the phone, runs to the bathroom, then to the kitchen, pours coffee into himself, simultaneously browsing social networks, and after 20–30 minutes flies out of the house with the only thought: “When it’s the weekend, at least I’ll get some sleep!”

I've been an owl all my life. I greeted the early morning with a tremendous sense of anxiety. I eventually got fed up with it, and just a few years ago, I turned the morning into my favorite time of day. How? I filled it with my favorite things: a bath with a book, meditation, yoga, writing practices, a cup of coffee, combined with work on articles and other materials. For me, morning is a time of silence and calmness, despite the fact that I am a mother. I try to get up two hours before the child wakes up precisely in order to devote time to setting up for the day and internal fulfillment.

Think about what activities give you energy, what you always look forward to, and bring it into your morning. Start the day the way you want it.

**2\. Practice Anticipation**

A person does not live from dream to dream, but from the anticipation of a dream to the anticipation of a dream. The feeling of anticipation gives a tremendous resource and energy. But what gives us a strong sense of anticipation, we do not plan very often. And it's important to do it every day.

Fill your week with events that you look forward to. This will give your brain a message: the pleasures did not end with the holidays, everything is just beginning. It can be anything: a trip to the theater, an evening reading with the kids, a date, a visit to the pool, a massage at the end of the week.

Anticipation is a very vital feeling and makes the one who experiences it "alive".

What could it be for you? Make a list right now.

**3\. Practice “Planning Easy Goals”**

Just as you should not eat heavy food on an empty stomach, so you should not plan super-achievements for a non-resource state. The process of entering the resource should always be neat and smooth.

Back in December, I usually write out a plan for goals for January. These goals should be very easy and achievable. What is it for? Everyone knows that neurotransmitters are responsible for our vitality: dopamine, serotonin, oxytocin and endorphin. These are hormones, which are also produced from achievements. Moreover, it is not so important for the hormone whether you built a house or did 15 push-ups, if the goal was just that. Why is everyone so fond of ticking off completed tasks on their to-do lists? Because this process contributes to the production of those same hormones. And they increase our resourcefulness and desire to do more.

Start with light weights and a clear plan. A clear plan of action and the simplicity of their implementation will make it possible not to waste energy on additional efforts.

What would you like to fill your day, month or year with?

**4\. Practice Moments to remember**

In the process of knowing yourself and your vitality, it is very important to be extremely honest and sincere with yourself, to understand your true values.

There is a great practice that will simplify the process of knowing yourself. I call it Moments to remember.

Create a personal Telegram channel for yourself, where you will add photos and videos of moments that you would like to remember forever. Right now, post two or three videos from 2021 and early 2022 there. Strive to ensure that you always have content to run your channel on a daily basis. Difficult? Yes, but it's always a matter of focus.

Over time, you will see what moments bring you real pleasure, what is important and truly valuable for you. If you set a goal to earn a million dollars, and in your personal channel there is mainly a photo in which your cat poses, you should think about whether you really need these millions?

{{<ads>}}

**5\. Practice "I want"**

Another brick in the strong wall of our vitality is to know exactly what you really want. Sometimes it is very difficult to separate your true desires from the socially approved desires or the desires of your grandmother, neighbor, work colleagues.

Right now, create a record of "What I really want" and record everything that you think is your true desires. Reread this list every morning and boldly remove what no longer gives you energy (whether you succeeded or not). Don't be afraid to throw out the baby with the water, your true desires will not go anywhere.

If every day you look into such a record, then in a year you will have several dozen of your real “I want”. It remains to translate them into action - and full speed ahead.

Before moving on to the second part of the article, re-evaluate the energy level in your body on a scale of 1 to 10. Compare the new number with the first. What changed?

Has the energy increased? Sometimes it is enough to learn something new so that the level of the resource increases and the motivation to act appears.

Has the energy decreased or remained unchanged? Well, keep reading on - you may be used to working with long-term goals and objectives.

Five steps to build a resource base for the future
--------------------------------------------------

**Step #1 Use the energy capital formula.**

There is a simple formula for accumulating and multiplying a resource or energy capital, it is important to check it every day. In the future, this will help you get to know yourself better and develop your own checklist and tools on how to quickly enter the resource.

{{<ads>}}

The formula "income - expenses \\u003d delta × meanings", where

*   income is what fills us with energy,
*   expenses - what takes energy,
*   delta is what remains after taking into account income and expenses (and yes, it often has a negative value),
*   meanings - that which multiplies energy, nourishes and creates the so-called capital.

Everything is simple here. As in conventional finance, in order to get rich (= come in and be resourceful), your income (= energy sources) must exceed your expenses (= energy guzzlers). That is, the main task is to ensure that your delta is always in the black.

**Step #2: Always monitor your condition.**

Above, I talked about the focus, which gives energy and "fuel". So, our state at least sometimes should be in our focus. Then it will work.

How well do we know ourselves and can we easily fill in the component formulas (our income and expenses) that work for us? We often do not know much about ourselves and live in an illusion, but it is important to be aware and be honest with ourselves.

Start observing your thoughts, feelings, and actions. Set an alarm for every two hours and during the week note every time it rings: “what am I doing?”, “how do I feel?”, “what am I thinking at this moment?”.

**Step #3. Fix the state.**

Aerobatics is not just to celebrate, but to write down the answers to the questions above. You can keep a state diary.

Once I caught myself thinking that, doing what I love and being in a chic mood, somewhere at the subconscious level, I thought that the project, which I really counted on, most likely would not work out. Why did this happen? Thanks to this practice, I caught and stopped this thought in time.

**Step #4: Increase your income and cut your expenses.**

The direct answer to the question of how to enter the year in a resourceful state is to increase income (that is, leave those deeds, thoughts and actions that fill you with energy and resources) and reduce costs (delegate or remove processes that steal your resource).

I keep a list of income and focus on increasing it. For example, my 100% energy income is a bathroom with a book in the morning. This procedure can fill me with energy, in whatever broken state I may be. Therefore, no matter what happens, I do not deprive myself of such pleasure. Never. This is a tradition.

In our time, inner state is the most important investment. And, like any investment, it must be regular.

**Step #5: Find meaning.**

Every step you take after a vacation or holidays should be important and filled with meaning for you personally, otherwise the body will start to resist, and you will catch what is called holiday blues or post-vacation syndrome in international practice.

No practices and techniques will support your resource in the long run if you do not see the point in what you are doing. If you don’t want to return to work after a vacation, it means that you haven’t found your personal meaning in this. The main question that you should ask yourself if there is not enough resource is “Why do I need what I plan to do and what I don’t have energy for now?”. The answer to it is the main tool that can increase your energy delta.

**Author:** *Olga Kasyan, managing partner of Smart Communication Group, resource and vitality expert*
