---
title: "How not to lose ideas after creative sessions"
description: Any company needs fresh ideas. One of the tools for their search is creative sessions. But often ideas after them “turn into a pumpkin” and are quickly forgotten. Alexey Golikov, CEO of the Digital Solutions Workshop, tells how to avoid this
date: 2022-02-27T09:11:01+08:00
lastmod: 2022-02-27T09:11:01+08:00
images:
- S2QaSHv.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Alexey Golikov
interest: management
channel: 
- team management
- modern management techniques
tags: 
---

Before, I never thought about the fact that creativity is a trend. And now it is difficult to find a job where this skill is not listed as required. I would even call the current period in history the creative age. The 18th century is gallant, the 20th is technological, and the 21st is creative.

However, the ideas themselves, given the general trend for creativity, have depreciated today. They are relatively easy to generate. Even a completely uncreative person can come up with a cool idea in a session. Yes, it requires training in skill and observation, but it is still possible.

How to organize the storage of ideas, especially after long meetings and sessions? Let's start with the attitudes that we rely on in our company and which help us develop the right attitude towards creativity.

Four postulates of creativity
-----------------------------

**1\. Creativity must be applied**

The creativity trend is literally driving businesses crazy. Companies are looking for people who can come up with good ideas on a regular basis. Entire conferences on the topic of creativity gather, more than one hundred articles have been written, people unite in thematic groups, create chat rooms, and sell courses. But there is a problem: many put creativity at the forefront, and this is the wrong approach. The tool becomes an end in itself, instead of serving specific tasks. That is, it turns out creativity for the sake of creativity.

{{<ads>}}

In order for ideas to be useful, during creative sessions, keep in mind the control question: “What is the shortest way to lead the team to the desired result?”

**2\. Ideas need to be captured**

Any idea spoken out loud, but not written down, remains just a "thought in the air." The easiest way is to write down ideas in notes, but participants in creative sessions during "hot" discussions do not always have time to do this.

The tracker will help to cope with this problem. It is convenient if it has a function of voice input of text. Then you do not have to click on the keys of the laptop in the midst of a meeting, when you need to quickly fix the thought that has arisen.

When we started holding creative sessions two years ago, sometimes everything was mixed up in one heap: operational, strategic issues, creative ideas. We quickly recognized the problem.

Now we are keeping tables-protocols - separate for each composition of participants. In these tables, we prioritize ideas based on employee ratings on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is low priority and 5 is high priority.

{{<ads>}}

We send the leading ideas for further development — we conduct marketing research, based on the results of which we make a decision on implementation and calculate the budget. Next, we draw up a technical task and transfer the tasks to development.

When we have time and resources, we pull out promising thoughts from there, take them to a new creative session and “finish it”.

**3\. Each idea needs to be described in detail**

This helps to understand its feasibility, as well as to see the “gaps” and think about what is missing. Spending half an hour and rejecting weak creatives at an early stage is clearly cheaper than conducting research worth a couple of million rubles.

There is another interesting detail in this paragraph. Imagine: you are sitting in another creative session. And suddenly an idea comes to your mind, it has every chance not to fall into the number of defective ones. You offer it to your colleagues, describe it, start discussing it. And then suddenly you realize that you have already voiced the thought before, just everyone has already forgotten. Familiar? I'm sure many have had it. In fact, you and your colleagues spent time on something that has already been invented before. This happens when the idea was either not fixed, or it was done in a hurry. The idea that the previous time the solution was better, but all the details can no longer be remembered, is itching in my head. And then you get furious with the realization that you came up with “the same idea, but worse.”

Conclusion: share in the comments to the table your opinions about the "newly found" ideas.  
  
Below is an example of a good and bad fixation of an idea.

{{<info>}}
An example of a good idea description
-------------------------------------

“Integration with messengers: organize the ability to send an order from the messenger to the application in such a way that it gets into the task section and that a deadline is assigned to it (if the message contains time indications: today, tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, a week later, a specific date) , an artist from the list of users with a suitable name was suggested.

An example of a bad idea description
------------------------------------

Organize the ability to transform messages from WhatsApp into tasks.
{{</info>}}

I also noticed that the formulations that the authors voiced when describing the idea for the first time turn out to be the most successful. Therefore, it is important to keep them.

**4\. You need to allocate time and resources to implement ideas.**

I cannot say that we fully adhere to this postulate. But I think it's important to mention that any idea that remains at the stage of the text is the time and money that went into coming up with it, describing and discussing it. And also lost profits, because there is a chance that the idea will shoot.

Creative sessions: how to conduct
---------------------------------

We regularly hold creative sessions for specific tasks. For example, to form an approach for the implementation of new product functionality.

Sidebar: breakthrough ideas arise at the intersection of different areas, sometimes, at first glance, incompatible. Example: stores and courier delivery, which gave rise to grocery delivery services. Therefore, it is great when both experts and employees who are not immersed in the field, but competent and creative, participate in the discussion. It is desirable that the meeting was more than two people.

**Creative session script**

The meeting format is classic. An agenda is formed with a description of the topic and a list of issues. I recommend including no more than five items on the agenda. One person acts as a moderator. In our company, this is usually me.

First, I voice the topic. Then I invite everyone to speak in turn. I make sure that no one interrupts anyone. It is important. If one participant shares an idea, while the other has his own and he immediately complements the speaker, this knocks down the timing and creates chaos. In the meantime, people tend to do just that: they want everyone to immediately know about a new cool idea. Therefore, you need to follow the order of performances.

While everyone is talking, I capture ideas on a flipchart. Then I start a second round of discussions - to listen to what additional thoughts people had when listening to what colleagues came up with. Having formed a list of ideas, we rank them by priority, set tasks for elaboration.

**External factors that affect the result**

I understand that it's hard to have creative sessions anywhere but online these days. But still, let's abstract a little from the COVID-19 pandemic.

Creative sessions will be more productive if you have the opportunity to physically place yourself in a classroom environment. For example, we have a format of outdoor creative sessions for three days. We warn the team in advance when the session is scheduled, send out the agenda and issues that we will discuss. We specifically choose locations designed for recreation. Before the introduction of restrictions, such sessions were the most productive. The secret is that people prepared for them in advance.

Furnishings + location = 50% of the result

Fly in the ointment: creative sessions, even with the most thorough preparation, are not a panacea. There are also failures. Let me illustrate with a specific story.

{{<ads>}}

One day we were faced with the task of changing the name of a product. At first, we, together with colleagues, came up with a new name. Then they conducted a survey among the employees of the company. We discussed the name with the management and arranged a competition among external performers, in which about 20 people participated. As a result, more than 200 variants of names of varying degrees of adequacy were invented. We were never able to choose the final version of them, but we spent a lot of time.

  
In conclusion, I would like to say that we have built a working system of creative sessions and processing of ideas within the company. However, we implement a very small part of what we have generated. This is a problem that has yet to be solved - to find the time and resources to ensure that ideas do not remain just ideas in the table.

**Author:** *Alexey Golikov, CEO of Digital Solutions Workshop*