---
title: "Office romance: three pros and cons of relationships at work"
description: Love is a wonderful feeling, but it's one thing if Cupid's arrows caught up at a party, in the gym or on a tour, and another if it happened at work. Psychologist Irina Mamaeva shares her reflections on the pros and cons of an office romance with HeadHunter
date: 2022-05-29T00:39:40+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-29T00:39:40+08:00
images:
- wo99E7T.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Everton Vila / Unsplash'
authors:
- Irina Mamaeva
interest: self development
channel: 
- career
- mindfulness
tags: 
---

Some proposed circumstances and diametrically opposed outcomes of two stories.

**History 1** . _“Maxim and I came to work for the company at the same time. Almost immediately, in addition to business, we began a romantic relationship. We didn't hide them, but we didn't show them either. Of course, colleagues quickly guessed everything. Our team is young, everyone was sympathetic. Six months later we got married, and a year later I went on maternity leave. Maxim continues to work for the company. After maternity leave, I plan to return to my previous position, because I like my job, and I think we have already learned how to combine personal and business relationships with my husband, ”Olga, sales manager of a manufacturing company_ .

**History 2** . _“We had a classic situation: I am the secretary, Kirill is the boss. Previously, it seemed to me that such stories are found only in jokes and films, but I myself did not notice how I began an affair with the boss. After two months of secret meetings, I realized that I did not want to be with Cyril. When I informed him of my decision, he became furious and fired me. Since then, I have had a taboo on office romances, ”- Elena, secretary_ .

According to what scenario the relationship will go - no one can guess at the stage of their beginning. So is it worth surrendering to the will of the senses or is it better to build a personal life outside of work? This question cannot be answered unequivocally - this is an individual, personal story of each. But you can speculate about the pros and cons of an office romance.

{{< ads >}}

Pros
----

### Without a break from "production"

Enough has been said about the pace and rhythms of modern life (especially in megacities). We spend a third of our lives at work, and if you do not count sleep, then even half. Often, we simply do not have time for personal life (no matter how much they talk about work-life balance, not everyone and not always manages to keep it). At the same time, no one canceled the need for romantic relationships. Therefore, willy-nilly, we begin to consider colleagues as potential partners: your fate may be waiting for you at the table opposite or in the next department.

### Opportunity to get to know people well

Long-term cooperation allows you to get to know the character and habits of another person quite well. If it takes months or even years for couples that have not formed within the same organization, then when working side by side it happens much faster. And if it is customary for a company to hold various corporate events, it becomes possible to learn a person’s behavior in an informal setting.

_“I used to be skeptical about office romances even though some of my male co-workers dated girls from other departments. One day, Katya came to work in a neighboring unit. We were assigned to lead a joint project, so we spent a lot of working time side by side. It was pleasant and comfortable to communicate with Katya. After a while, I realized that I like her not only as a colleague, but also as a girl. I told her about my feelings, they were mutual. Now we have been living together for almost a year, our relationship is very deep and warm. I think that life together is going well, largely due to the fact that we got to know each other well during our joint work,” Andrey, IT company specialist._

### Increase Productivity

When we are in love, we feel inspired. The reason for this is the hormones oxytocin and dopamine, which give the very feeling of flight. In this state, it seems that we are able to move mountains, and any obstacles seem insignificant. In addition, in a state of love, new creative ideas and inspiration often come.

Cons
-------

### The need to work together after a breakup

“Out of sight, out of mind,” says the proverb. Getting over a breakup is easier if your paths with your ex-partner no longer intersect. A completely different story is if you are forced to see your ex-lover every day at the next table or in the service dining room.

Constantly being nearby, it is almost impossible to fully end the relationship. Parting becomes like a painful splinter that cannot be pulled out in any way. In addition, a new office romance is possible with a former partner, which will develop right before your eyes. Having to stay under the same roof after a breakup becomes an ordeal. Often in such situations, one or both are forced to quit.

_“By the time Oleg joined our company, I had been working there for about seven years and had been married for three years. The new colleague immediately took an interest in me. Gradually signs of attention on his part became more and more. At first I treated it as a game, but after a while I realized that I fell in love. Soon we started dating secretly. Six months later, I left my husband and moved in with Oleg. After a month of living together, I was overtaken by an unpleasant realization: what at first I took for love, in fact, turned out to be just a hobby. We soon parted ways. Seeing Oleg at work every day after the break was unbearable, and I quit. My marriage and career were destroyed, ”- Ekaterina, marketer for a network of medical centers._

### Too much time together

If in a relationship you are more inclined towards autonomy, then the need to be near your loved one, not only at home, but also at work, is unlikely to please. It is important for each person to have personal space, and in a situation of office romance it is practically non-existent. In addition, partners-colleagues, constantly being together, quickly lose the feeling of joy and novelty in the relationship.

It is also likely that even on vacation they will discuss production problems, and the line between office and home will be erased. In addition, there is a big risk that personal quarrels will interfere with the work process and vice versa - professional disagreements will make their own adjustments to personal life.

### Judgment of colleagues

No matter how hard you try to hide a romantic connection from colleagues, sooner or later it will become known. Human nature is such that most people are interested in the details of someone else's life. And the reaction to the news can be different - it depends on people and on each specific situation. Therefore, when starting a close relationship at work, one must be prepared for increased attention from colleagues. Maybe positive, maybe negative.

Whether or not to have a romantic connection at work is up to you. On the one hand, a relationship with a colleague can turn out to be the love of a lifetime, and it would be a shame to miss your happiness because of the vow made to yourself “Relationships at work are taboo!”. On the other hand, an office romance can cost you a reputation and a career that you have been building for years. But who knows what is best for you? So listen to your heart, love and be loved.

_All hero names have been changed, any matches are random._

**Author:** *Irina Mamaeva, psychologist*