---
title: "Four levels: how to set up efficient warehouse operation"
description: Warehouse managers are usually so busy with routine that they do not find time to think about global solutions. Therefore, they are often mistaken when starting to implement IT solutions when the business is not yet ready. And you need to sequentially go through these four levels
date: 2022-06-08T01:56:25+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T01:56:25+08:00
images:
- XrW4fa2.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Wang He / Getty Images'
authors:
- alpina
interest: logistics
channel: 
- warehouse and cargo
- instruction
tags: 
---

_From the book “Warehouse as a competitive advantage. What to do to become better”, by Jeroen Pieter van den Berg, Alpina Publisher._

For decades, warehouse managers have haphazardly, albeit effectively, improved the performance of their distribution centers, increasing the level of logistics operations. However, such progress is slow and difficult. A large number of projects, in particular those related to either IT or supply chain management, have had little or no success.

Perhaps this has nothing to do with the essence of the projects or the systems themselves. It is possible that they were excellent. The problem, most likely, was that attempts to implement these projects were made when the organization was not yet ready for them.

Thus, the correct order of implementation of projects can ensure their success.

This is comparable to building a house. First you need to lay the foundation, then we build the walls, the roof and finish with the interior. If you perform this process in any other sequence, the consequences will be disastrous.

In distribution centers, we can face three main problems that prevent the successful implementation of new projects:

*   absorption of the project (or its leader) by the daily routine;
*   introduction of new technologies before the completion of debugging business processes;
*   implementation of projects for the integration of links in supply chains without proper information and system support.

{{<ads>}}

Most leaders are immersed in their daily routine. Ironically, they are so busy solving everyday problems that they rarely find time to solve more global ones. Accordingly, they are trying to solve current problems by introducing new software. However, if the new software has to work with old, inefficient processes, there is no benefit in implementing it. In fact, the need to match new software to the requirements of old processes puts the entire project at risk, as significant changes to the system (customization) are likely to be required.

Thus, warehouse management as a source of competitive advantage of the company seeks to ensure the correctness of processes by improving, changing, increasing - in a word, doing everything that is required to restore order after years of neglecting the warehouse and, as a result, no changes. In other words, it is necessary to clean up the processes before imposing new technologies on them.

In addition, warehouse managers often resist the innovations associated with the integration process in the supply chain. Supply Chain Management (SCM) provides a close relationship between business and business processes in order to maximize the total added value in the supply chain.

Thus, the necessary conditions for successful cooperation of all parts of the supply chain are:

*   the subordination of the parties involved to the goals of the business and the supply chain as a whole, as well as the exchange of information to coordinate their actions;
*   good internal organization of the parties involved. Cooperation reinforces their interdependence, so it becomes essential to act according to agreed standards;
*   that the parties involved have the necessary information technology appropriate to the scale of the task and the associated decision-making challenges.

If these conditions are met, supply chain integration projects will be significantly more successful.

Four stages of warehouse development
------------------------------------

So what should be the right distribution center development strategy? The warehouse management methodology as a source of competitive advantage offers a growth path that avoids these three pitfalls in the implementation of development projects. It enables the head of the warehouse complex to bring a poorly organized warehouse to a leading position in its industry.

The development path distinguishes four stages:

*   **situational** warehouse management;
*   **efficient** warehouse management;
*   **advanced** warehouse management;
*   **collaborative** warehouse management.

**The first stage of development** (situational warehouse management) serves as the basis for subsequent stages. It is a distribution center where processes are not structured or defined. Such a warehouse is characterized by general unreliability in operation. The leader must constantly respond to the same events that occur daily or hourly. “Personal heroism” and “non-standard solutions” are the only things that allow such a distribution center to exist.

**The second stage** is the organization of effective warehouse management. At this stage, the distribution center management is standardized. We build a systematic organization of business processes, set goals, determine costs and target values ​​of performance indicators. These efforts not only simplify operational management, but also contribute to the successful analysis and resolution of problematic issues. The distribution center becomes an efficient link in the supply chain.

**The third stage** is to create advanced warehouse management. At this stage, we use information technology to increase productivity and improve the quality of work. IT is a powerful tool for improving logistics. Nevertheless, the existing management models in logistics are unlikely to resort to the use of intelligent information systems. We propose to use new principles of planning and control, reacting to events in real time.

{{<ads>}}

**The fourth and final stage**  is collaborative warehouse management. At this stage, we are re-examining the role of the distribution center in the supply chain. We look beyond the four walls of our warehouse. In other words, in the previous stages, we aimed to do the job right, without wondering if we were doing the right job. In this step, we will demonstrate how to improve the functioning of the entire supply chain through closer cooperation with the rest of the participants.

Thus, the warehouse management methodology as a source of competitive advantage offers a growth model. This model defines the manager's actions at four stages of warehouse development. In the second stage (effective warehouse management), we create the basis for organizing the warehouse. Then, in the third stage (advanced warehouse management), we implement intelligent management. And finally, in the fourth step (collaborative warehouse management), we will transform the supply chain. Each previous stage allows you to organize the successful operation of the distribution center at the next one.

Is it necessary to strictly follow the sequence of stages of growth? In principle yes, but there may be exceptions. If there is an opportunity in the supply chain to achieve a quick effect from the cooperation of links, that is, an opportunity characteristic of the fourth stage of development, while the distribution center is still at the first, then the manager should not refuse to implement it.

Take what suits you best! However, remember that the warehouse itself must be ready for this, and keep in mind that the link integration project can be carried out more easily and with greater success after the third stage is completed. In any case, be careful when you deal with the next level.