---
title: "These 10 Bad Judgments Are Stopping You From Getting Sales Growth"
description: The best learning is practice, the best plan is to capture the entire market at once. Instructions kill creativity. Customers are equally priority - all these are harmful judgments that prevent the company from selling, Anna Mironova, Sales Director of AB InBev Efes, is sured
date: 2022-06-08T01:34:33+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T01:34:33+08:00
images:
- n5ficS5.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- anna mironova
interest: sales
channel: 
- b2b sales
tags: 
---

Harmful Judgment #1: Those Who Have No Intuition Need a Strategy
----------------------------------------------------------------

In fact, any business needs a sales strategy, regardless of its size. Analysis of the market situation, the study of customers, the formulation of measurable goals and priorities will allow the most rational distribution of resources, organize the work of employees and set adequate KPIs.

As a result, from the collected data, a clear guide to action will be obtained, which should be conveyed to each employee of the sales department. Sales managers must not only know the characteristics of the product and their own performance indicators, but also understand where the company is going and how it is going to behave in the market.

Depending on the characteristics of the market, the sales strategy can be calculated both for a year and for a longer period. In stable conditions, large companies can follow a three-year or five-year plan. In times of uncertainty, it makes sense to have shorter-term options at hand and several crisis scenarios that can be implemented depending on the current situation. In a turbulent market situation, it is always worth having a ready-made plan that you can rely on instead of urgently developing it from scratch.

Bad Judgment #2: The best plan is to capture the entire market at once.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

When compiling a sales plan, entrepreneurs often take goals “from the ceiling”, without relying on the real performance of the company and without looking back at market behavior. A good plan starts with objective numbers: current income, estimated income, minimum revenue required to break even, current operational and logistical capabilities, target audience. The analysis of this data allows us to set realistic goals, the achievement of which will contribute to the further development of the company.

It is also important to remember that planning is not a one-time event, but a diffuse and planned process. Goals should be regularly reviewed and adjusted based on new inputs and changes in the market situation.

{{<ads>}}

Bad Judgment #3: Instructions Kill Creativity
---------------------------------------------

On the contrary, instructions increase profits. Therefore, it is highly desirable to regulate the actions of a sales manager at each stage of the funnel. Where to look for buyers, how to present a product, how to work out objections - it is better to think over the answers to these and other questions in advance and “pack” them into a short set of rules. Standardization of the process will eliminate ridiculous mistakes and increase the efficiency of the entire department.

However, avoid the extreme - you should not create voluminous volumes that regulate every movement of the manager. The document should be small, clear and very practical. If you wish, you can visualize the sales algorithm in the form of flowcharts, tables, or short videos. So, we launched a special information system for employees. It contains manuals and scripts, data on the performance of specific managers and departments, as well as news. In addition, gamification elements have been introduced in the system to motivate staff.

Bad judgment #4. CRM is only useful for big business.
-----------------------------------------------------

There are no exact statistics on the use of CRM systems in Russia. But, according to some data, in 2019, only 17% of companies in Russia used services and programs for interacting with customers. For comparison: in Europe they are used by 35-40%.

At the same time, the implementation of CRM is one of the most accessible and easy ways to increase the efficiency of the sales department, even in a small business. With its help, you can see at what stage each transaction is, you can evenly distribute the workload of sales managers, identify leaders and laggards, and adjust plans based on this.

In addition, the CRM system will help identify weaknesses in the sales funnel: it will be clear at which stage of the funnel the most customers disappear.

{{<ads>}}

Harmful Judgment #5: A company prioritizes all products and customers equally.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In fact this is not true. Regular sales analysis will show which products and customers bring the main profit, and which ones just take time. In large companies, separate specialists are often hired to analyze sales. They know a lot of analytical metrics and can adjust the work of the department based on them. However, you can start small, such as ABC and XYZ analysis.

Divide the data from CRM into three groups. Group A should be the customers and products that bring the highest percentage of profit, B - the average percentage, and C - the smallest. Usually the ratio corresponds to the Pareto principle confirmed by statistics: customers and products from group A will account for 80% of the profit, and B and C - the remaining 20%.

By analogy, in XYZ analysis, customers are divided into those who buy regularly, occasionally, or very rarely.

The same logic will help you identify the best-selling and least-demanded products. In this way, it will be possible to segment products or customers and focus on the most promising of them (groups AX and BX).

Bad Judgment #6: Sales is Sales and Marketing is Marketing
----------------------------------------------------------

The eternal question “should the marketing and sales departments be separated?” seems to still have no unanimous answer. In young companies, it is possible to combine these functions in the person of one specialist or a small department. However, sooner or later, especially in b2b, marketing and sales become separate divisions.

At this stage, it is important to avoid mismatch. Both marketers and salespeople should have a clear idea of ​​what the company wants to achieve, for example, by launching a new product or doing a rebrand. Otherwise, sellers will not understand what they need to do, and marketers will not worry about a failed launch or restart of a product, as well as inefficiently spent money on advertising.

Coordination can be achieved by regular joint meetings or subordination of both departments to one head. For example, in our company, all stages of bringing a new product to the market are discussed cross-functionally, and this is not only the interaction of the sales and marketing departments, other departments are also involved: finance, revue management, distribution and logistics, production, planning. We start work on the launch of a new product only when all members of the working group have a clear vision of:

*   what and why we bring to the market,
*   what niche are we closing,
*   Who are we going to sell to?
*   how distribution will be built,
*   what will be the pricing
*   how much will the company earn
*   whether there are production facilities, etc.

{{<ads>}}

Bad Judgment #7: The Client's Problems Are Not My Problems
----------------------------------------------------------

A good manager does not sell the product itself, but the result that the client will receive when using it. In order to make an accurate value proposition and effectively build interaction with customers, you need to be puzzled by customer analytics.

For these purposes, there may not be enough metrics from the CRM system, you will have to turn to more complex analytical tools - BI systems. However, first of all, it is necessary to establish regular collection of customer data, their filtering and systematization. In data collection, in addition to IT tools, it is worth using traditional surveys and focus groups.

It is especially difficult to analyze customers in b2b companies that are set up to work individually with key customers. In this case, the sales manager must not only study the needs and problems of the buyer well, but also know the problems of the customer, take into account the psychological profile of the decision maker (DM), thoroughly know the features of the path that the client goes through before buying (Customer Journey Map).

In interaction with clients, a win-win approach is extremely important, and even better if it is a win-win-win - when both the company, the client and the end consumer win. It's difficult, but not impossible! It is necessary to build a trusting relationship with the client from the first stage of interaction. Become a guru for him in your field, always take into account the needs of both the company and the person (buyer) with whom you interact. It is important that your product covers at least part of the needs of partners. When presenting a new product, focus on the current growth of its category, not on the growth of your market share. Using data based on customer research and profiling pays off quickly. Deloitte estimates that customer-focused companies are 60% more profitable than their competitors.

Bad Judgment #8: If an Employee Can Sell to Individuals, They Can Sell to Companies
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The difference between sales in b2b and b2c is worth dwelling on separately. Often, when selecting sales managers, novice entrepreneurs do not pay attention to the segment in which the applicant worked. Although in practice, a b2c sales master can be absolutely useless in negotiations with business buyers.

The key difference to always keep in mind is that in b2b the manager is talking to the decision maker for the business, while b2c is talking to the consumer. This nuance dictates completely different approaches and terms of sales. A b2b specialist will have to study his product and decision maker more deeply, since the client, most likely, will not be inclined to emotional purchase. Also, for sure, he will have to go through more negotiations with representatives of the customer and be prepared for the fact that the deal may stretch for several months.

On the contrary, a b2c manager must be an emotional engagement specialist, be able to work with big data and quickly adapt to each new consumer. Be sure to account for this difference when hiring professionals.

{{<ads>}}

Bad Judgment #9: The Best Learning Is Practice
----------------------------------------------

An important point that is not forgotten in large companies, but often neglected in small businesses is employee training. Psychological training, joint listening to calls, pitching lessons, presentation master classes - all this should be considered not as pleasant bonuses, but as a systematic process.

No need to think that this process must necessarily be very expensive. For example, we have created a special training portal for the sales team, where each employee can receive training on a topic of interest to him. On the same portal, we give recommendations on what an employee needs to know in order to take this or that position.

In addition, it is very important to regularly identify strengths and areas for employee development. This way they can concentrate on certain materials, and not study everything in a row. In addition, it is worth encouraging employees who show an interest in self-education.

Harmful Judgment No. 10. The new is the well-forgotten old
----------------------------------------------------------

This is not the case with sales. The world is changing rapidly, and with it, consumer behavior is changing. For example, in the West, buyers in b2b, according to Gartner, spend only 24% of their time meeting with potential suppliers. In other cases, they prefer digital communication channels. Over time, this percentage will decrease. Such dynamics requires a change in one's own approaches and the development of new tools.

For example, we launched an online b2b platform even before the pandemic. With its help, distributors can independently get acquainted with the product and place an order. More than 65 thousand points have already connected to the system, and the sales volume of our distributors has grown by 122%.

If we talk about b2c, then we should not underestimate the prospects of social networks and online platforms as trading platforms. Changing consumer behavior and the explosive growth of sales on marketplaces indicate that a conservative approach and focus exclusively on offline is a sure way to stagnate or even close a business.

The market is supplying us with more and more data. For their effective analysis, it is worth turning to solutions based on artificial intelligence. 80% of executives who have implemented such solutions say they have improved customer experience, and 70% say they have achieved cost savings using AI.

**Author:** *Anna Mironova, Sales Director, AB InBev Efes*