---
title: "Why some projects within the company fail"
description: More than 11% of all resources used in projects are wasted, and almost one in five managers admit that they dream of leaving project management. Why is this happening and what projects should not be launched, the BITOBE expert understands
date: 2022-06-09T08:55:34+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T08:55:34+08:00
images:
- 3ZwYEVP.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Denis Zlokazov
interest: management
channel: 
- modern management techniques
tags: 
---

The reasons for failures can be called different: it is poor-quality management, and the lack of methodology, and a lack of resources or competencies. However, the main problem usually lies in the following:

*   projects are launched without a customer, and then the ultimate goal of the project is not clear and no one in the company needs it;
*   the customer changes the goal of the project already in the course of its implementation and cannot decide what he wants to achieve as a result.

Imagine that someone proposes to implement a CRM system in a company that has done without it for a long time: "Everyone already lives with CRM, but we don't." Or: “How so! All plants are switching to their own generation, let's put a gas-fired power plant at our place!” The idea sounds good, and the project is launched. In the worst case, it will drag on, turn into a long-term construction, they will continue to invest resources, health and nerves in it, and then they will formally close it.

Such a project does not bring joy, and most importantly, no benefits and no effects for the company. Therefore, projects that are put into operation should be consistent with the business objectives and strategy of the company as a whole. So that later it does not turn out that no one described the effects or described instead of them such unearthly beauty that will never correspond to reality.

Returning to the first example: you can implement CRM in order to not lose customers and increase sales by 10%. Only now it may turn out that the system does not affect sales.

{{<ads>}}

What projects need to be launched
---------------------------------

All projects should bring a certain effect to the company, but the effects are different. Therefore, when answering the question of which projects should be launched, we focus on the types of effects.

**Effect types**

**1\. Economic**

**Extensive growth**  - increase in revenue or sales volumes, entry into new markets.  
**Optimization**  - cost reduction, cost reduction, opportunity for margin growth.

They pursue purely economic goals, so their effectiveness is easily measured by indicators such as NPV or IRR.

**2\. Risk reduction**

Efficiency is estimated as the ratio of possible damage to the project budget.

Such projects do not pursue explicit economic goals and do not affect profits, but help to avoid possible sanctions and losses.

For example, for non-compliance with environmental standards, the work of the plant can be stopped for 90 days, which means billions in losses.

**3\. Social**

May not have a direct economic impact, but be in line with corporate culture or shareholder vision. They are able to improve the reputation of the company or reduce the tax burden, but this is not their main goal.

For example: the reconstruction of a music school, the construction of a temple, etc. The main thing is that the customer clearly defines the effects that the project should bring.

How a company allocates resources to projects with different types of effects is a company's strategic decision that relates to project portfolio management. Limits are distributed within the portfolio for each of the categories. Then, within each category, projects are ranked by performance indicators: in the first two cases, these are economic indicators, in the third case, the ratio of possible damage to the budget, and in the last case, the decisions of the owners.

{{<ads>}}

Who is responsible for achieving the effect of projects
-------------------------------------------------------

The problem is that at this stage they simply forget to ask each other the question: “And who will we ask for achieving the effect?” Since there is a project manager who is responsible for ensuring that the project reaches its successful completion, there must be someone responsible who will say: “I accepted this result, and I continue to work with it to achieve the effect.” This is the role of the project customer. It follows from this that the role of the customer has a sufficient load. He can't show up at the start and say, "That's what I want..." and then say at the end, "No, I don't like it!"

Understanding his responsibility for achieving the effect in the future, the customer must formulate his desires as clearly as possible:

*   “in order to achieve an effect, I need the result to have such and such qualities”;
*   “so I need to make sure to develop these qualities as you create the result”;
*   “so I will come to intermediate checks to make sure that the quality suits me and I can accept the final result.”

This is a clear division of responsibility. And if there is a technical task, then the project manager can simply tell the customer: “I completed the TOR on all points, so it is your responsibility as a customer that you can or cannot achieve your effect with the help of such a result.” The worst case is when they say: "If there is no TK, then the result is HZ." This means that the customer wants something from the project manager, but has no idea how he will achieve the effect.

It is generally accepted that everywhere there are people who stand up for their cause and want improvements for themselves and for their company, and therefore order projects. This is a very strong assumption, since there are companies in which no one needs anything, and where you can launch projects without any sense.

{{<ads>}}

How to build interaction in the project in order to achieve the desired effects in the future
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the best result of the project, it is necessary to establish interaction between the participants. Therefore, even at the early stages of work, it is necessary to fix the requirements, plan the terms and stages of work, and hold intermediate meetings. Many of the tools for planning have been in use since the beginning of the history of project management. So, in 1910, engineer Henry Lawrence Gant developed the scheduling and network planning technique, a diagram that is still considered the standard in project management. Despite the development of technology during the industrial revolution, projects consisted of many simple tasks, and the main idea of ​​the Gantt chart was to decompose the project into these simple tasks and determine the deadlines for their completion. In fact, draw a comprehensive schedule so as not to forget anything.

A few decades later, during the Cold War, the race for space exploration began. The USSR had an advantage in the form of a state planning system and Sergei Korolev, who was able to keep a lot in his bright head. The United States was less fortunate: the Americans could not rely on someone's brilliant mind and relied on the complex cooperation of a large number of commercial organizations.

Since the result of the project in this case is very complex, the requirements for each of its components are described in as much detail as possible in order to transfer them within the framework of cooperation to the performers and then check the implementation according to the checklist. NASA developed a design work standard that included a chapter on systems engineering describing the processes for product design, development, and component compliance. Thus, a new approach to managing complex products was born, which later went hand in hand with project management. And if we open PMBOK (Eng. Project Management Body Of Knowledge - a body of knowledge on project management. - _RBC Pro_ ), we will see that:

*   quality in project management is the degree to which all requirements are met;
*   requirements in this case are formal principles that can be checked against the checklist and which guarantee the integrity and quality of the result.

{{<ads>}}

Requirements verification procedures include:

*   **verification**  - confirmation that the established requirements are met, but here it is worth remembering that even if the TOR is met, this does not mean that the effect can be achieved;
*   **validation**  is a subjective expert assessment, which not only confirms the fulfillment of formal requirements, but also indicates that the customer is satisfied with the result and it is possible to work with this result.

The sooner you start drawing up a project plan not just from a set of works, but based on the understanding that their implementation will allow you to meet the established requirements, the less risk you will have in the face of a dissatisfied customer. If you plan checkpoint reconciliations in order to close a specific amount of requirements in the checklist, and not just to have them, then the project team is aware of what must be done, when and for what purpose, the customer is involved in the project and keeps abreast, the probability of successful completion of the project and the achievement of an effect for the company with its help increases.

**Author:** *Denis Zlokazov, BITOBE Project Manager*