---
title: "Why Russia and China are betting on digital currencies"
description: 2022 was supposed to be the year of digital currencies in several countries at once. In China, the digital yuan was tested at the Olympics, in the Russian Federation and other countries, real tests began. When will digital currencies go mainstream?
date: 2022-06-12T07:57:31+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T07:57:31+08:00
images:
- b8PHwDl.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Nick Lukhminsky
interest: Investments
channel: 
- economics
tags: 
---

The world has already become accustomed to cryptocurrencies, but another fashionable novelty is on its way: digital currencies of national banks (CNB), or Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). It is essentially a digital form of traditional fiat currencies. Along with printing banknotes and minting coins, Central Banks around the world can issue electronic tokens of the same denomination as the local national currency. This fundamentally distinguishes CVNB from decentralized and highly volatile cryptocurrencies.

The use of CBDC simplifies settlements both within the country and when trading with foreign companies, experts say. Also, digital currencies can change the structure of world trade and the economy. How and when will the ruble appear in the Russian Federation?

What is CBDC
------------

As the name suggests, CBDC, or national bank digital currency, is a digital token whose value is pegged to the value of the government's fiat currency. CBDCs are similar to cryptocurrencies, more than others to “stablecoins” - their value is also tied to the value of a currency or a commodity from the real world.

CDBCs are usually divided into two categories:

"Wholesale", or wholesale, are intended for settlements between legal entities.

"Retail", or retail, can be used to pay for goods and services by individuals.

{{<ads>}}

CBDC supporters note that the use of digital currencies will solve several problems at once: for example, such money is almost impossible to counterfeit, and if stolen, it is easier to trace. Also, CBDCs are considered by regulators around the world as an alternative to cryptocurrencies due to the ease of regulation and the lack of anonymous wallets.

As of February 2022, nine countries have launched some form of CBDC on their territory: the Bahamas, Antigua and Barbuda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Montserrat, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Nigeria. Another 78 states are at different stages: from project development to tests.

Cambodia ahead of the planet 
-----------------------------

For the first time, national digital currencies were announced as legal tender in 2020 in the Commonwealth of the Bahamas and Cambodia. In the latter, by January 2022, more than 50% of the population, or 7.9 million citizens,  [used](https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Finance/Cambodia-s-digital-currency-reaches-nearly-half-the-population) CBDC through the national payment system Bakong.

Then they were joined by several other Caribbean countries, as well as Nigeria. In total, digital currencies have already been introduced in 10 countries of the world. All these states are classified as developing countries. They went for the experiment easily - in economic terms, they have nothing to lose.

In the UK, a digital currency project was launched but [stalled](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/11/12/central-bank-digital-currencies-are-moving-slowly-but-not-in-china.html) . “Britcoin” is unlikely to appear before 2025, and only if it can be proven that it can be “operationally and technologically strong.”

Chinese nuance
--------------

The most significant development in the CBDC world has been the digital yuan pilot project in China. At the beginning of 2021, six leading Chinese banks began testing cyberyuan, and in the summer it began to be accepted by the Beijing subway. In the summer of 2021, more than 20.8 million individual wallets and more than 3.5 million corporate wallets were opened in China. In total, users conducted 70.7 million transactions through them, worth approximately 34.5 billion yuan (about $5.4 billion). By December 2021, the number of e-wallets jumped to 261 million, with transactions [reaching](https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/article/3168949/will-western-sanctions-against-russia-over-ukraine-invasion) 87.6 billion yuan (about $13.9 billion).

{{<ads>}}

The main problem with the digital yuan is that it is [not at all welcome](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/11/12/central-bank-digital-currencies-are-moving-slowly-but-not-in-china.html) in the West . The Chinese cybercurrency is highly centralized; all transactions made with its help are easily tracked and can become an additional surveillance tool for the Chinese government.

The exhibition of achievements of the digital yuan was supposed to be the Olympic Games. The media [wrote](https://cointelegraph.com/news/digital-yuan-transactions-beat-out-visa-at-winter-olympics-venue-report) that for the first time in history, CBDC will have a chance to outperform traditional payment systems in all respects. As a result, the figures turned out to be modest: every day, users carried out transactions in the amount of $ 315 thousand per day. The official representative of the digital currency operator said that both Chinese citizens and foreigners used it. However, the latter more often still paid with Visa cards, [according to](https://www.aljazeera.com/economy/2022/2/4/at-olympics-beijing-sees-chance-to-sell-world-on-digital-yuan) the participants of the Olympiad interviewed by the media.

Start of tests in Russia
------------------------

[Russia started testing the digital](https://www.gazeta.ru/business/2022/02/15/14537539.shtml) ruble in February of this year. For the user, the main difference between the digital ruble and non-cash rubles is that the digital ruble is available to the owner even when the Internet is turned off. Experts believe that the digital ruble can help deal with illegal transactions and theft of money from citizens' accounts.

VTB and Promsvyazbank were the first to test the digital ruble. In total, the group of pioneers should include 12 banks: Ak Bars, Alfa-Bank, Dom.RF, VTB, Gazprombank, Tinkoff Bank, Promsvyazbank, Rosbank, Sberbank, SKB-Bank, Soyuz and Transcapitalbank.

{{<ads>}}

With the start of a special operation in Ukraine and the imposition of sanctions in Russia, there has been a surge in the popularity of cryptocurrencies. Only a few platforms agreed to support the sanctions policy - for example, OpenSea became unavailable for Russians and Belarusians. Most exchanges do not block Russian wallets, stating that this would be contrary to the very idea of ​​​​crypto. The largest exchanges Coinbase and Binance have even [stated](https://www.reuters.com/technology/coinbase-not-banning-russians-using-platform-ceo-says-2022-03-04/) that they do not plan to disable access to their services to users from the Russian Federation.

According to experts, the digital ruble will also be popular if it is launched. The sanctions imposed on Russia due to the situation in Ukraine not only did not prevent the experiment with a digital national currency, but, according [to](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/02/23/business/russia-sanctions-cryptocurrency.html) analysts, can accelerate its implementation. The New-York Times writes that the digital ruble could be used to bypass checkpoints set by the US, the EU and other countries, such as transferring money by banks. The digital ruble can be used in direct trade without prior conversion into dollars and without detection - similar schemes were previously tested by North Korea and Iran, the publication claims.

How Sanctions Will Help Digital Currencies
------------------------------------------

China believes that sanctions against Russia can give a new impetus to the development of the digital yuan. South China Morning Post, a government-affiliated media outlet, writes that it is digital currencies that can facilitate international financial transactions if restrictions are imposed on one of the parties to the transaction.

The publication draws attention to the fact that although China is the second largest economy in the world, the yuan is only the fourth world currency. According to banking messaging operator Swift, the yuan accounts for 3.2% of global payments. The US dollar (39.92%) and the euro (36.56%) are in the lead.

{{<ads>}}

“We believe that the promotion of the internationalization of the yuan should be vigorously promoted, especially through the development of the Cross-Border Interbank Payment System and the digital yuan,” [said](https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/article/3168949/will-western-sanctions-against-russia-over-ukraine-invasion) Ming Ming, an analyst at Citic Securities.

A similar opinion is [shared by the](https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2022/02/25/former-cftc-chair-giancarlo-on-russian-sanctions-cbdcs-and-dollar-hegemony/) former head of the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission Christopher Giancarlo: “Sanctions can become additional motivation and accelerate work on CBDC in China and the Russian Federation. Thus, they will have a chance to change the financial system, which is now based on the US dollar.”

**Author:** *Nick Lukhminsky*