---
title: "Music, dancing, tongue twisters: what will help improve brain function"
description: The brain is a lazy but plastic organ. Therefore, it can be trained to improve cognitive functions. Svetlana Pervyh (MDinc) tells what exercises will make you more resistant to age-related changes and help you return to normal after an illness
date: 2022-05-27T00:58:31+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-27T00:58:31+08:00
images:
- 65flg6Y.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Mario Tama / Getty Images'
authors:
- Svetlana Pervykh
interest: brain
channel: 
- health
tags: 
- mdinc
---


Cognitive health is thought to be influenced by genetics, environment, lifestyle, as well as age and past medical conditions. Some of these factors can impair thinking skills, affect the ability to perform everyday tasks, including driving and even cooking.

Why Cognitive Rehabilitation Is Needed
--------------------------------------

Cognitive rehabilitation is a set of activities and exercises that help restore or develop a person's brain abilities. There are two types of it:

*   **recovery** (after illness or injury). Helps to restore cognitive functions. It includes, for example, training memory and attention, everyday skills;
*   **progressive** (against age-related changes). Thanks to her, a person learns to process information faster and improves his cognitive skills.

Cognitive impairment is most pronounced in the case of brain diseases, in particular stroke. According to the Scientific Center for Neurology, in Russia this is the most common reason why people become disabled. In second place are neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease. The third common cause of cognitive impairment is traumatic brain injury.

{{< ads >}}

Cognitive problems are also observed in patients with COVID-19. According to various estimates, they are fixed in 30–50% of those who have had the disease. According to a study by the University of Strasbourg, 33% of patients with coronavirus discharged from the intensive care unit had reduced concentration, visuospatial disturbances were observed.

How to improve brain function
-----------------------------

The first step is to choose doctors who are engaged in the rehabilitation of different parts of the brain. This is not the task of one specialist. A speech therapist, a physiologist, a psychologist, a neurosurgeon and a neurologist are involved in the recovery process. Ideal if they work as a team.

It is necessary to prepare and realize that rehabilitation is not a quick process. On average, it takes about six months. The effectiveness of the program depends on many factors: the involvement of the patient, the regularity and duration of training. Support from loved ones plays an important role, since most often this period is very painful: the character, habits, actions, reactions and even the emotional background of the person undergoing rehabilitation changes.

Practical exercises for the restoration of cognitive functions can be divided into several blocks that involve a certain sense organ and skills. In the long term, they can reduce the likelihood that a person will have serious cognitive changes in old age. Therefore, they are also used for prevention.

Here are some of these areas of cognitive rehabilitation.

{{< ads >}}

**Music therapy.** Includes creating music, singing, dancing, listening and including discussion of various compositions. It helps restore hearing. Music therapy activates areas of the brain that are responsible for memory, emotion, movement, decision making, and reward. Studies show that it improves fluency, memory, and language ability in patients with mild Alzheimer's disease.

**Art therapy.** It can be passive - looking at pictures, listening to music, as well as active - drawing, modeling and other creative activities. During these activities, all areas of the brain are involved, including the frontal lobe, which is responsible for problem solving, memory, motivation, planning, and other important functions. In older people, memory and attention improve after three months of art therapy. This effect persists for at least six months if patients attend supportive classes.

**dance therapy.** It is also called dance-motor, as it helps to restore coordination. Also, according to studies, dance therapy is useful for improving executive function (planning, cognitive flexibility, attention control) in adults with Parkinson's disease.

**Aromatherapy.** Essential oils have been used for many years for medicinal purposes, such as the prevention of dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Aromatherapy prevents the decline of cognitive and motor functions, helps to improve memory and mood.

**Cognitive stimulation with the help of a computer.** Computer technologies are increasingly being integrated into cognitive rehabilitation. They are used to develop attention, memory, perception, planning skills and other abilities. Before stimulation, specialists conduct testing and evaluate the overall level of brain function. Then they make up a personal set of exercises. For example, by combining individual or standardized programs for pronunciation of words and difficult to pronounce tongue twisters with small movements of the hands (stimulate the speech center in the brain), one can form the correct pronunciation and significantly expand the stock of synonyms. This is very important for speakers, public people, teachers.

**Special exercises for recovery.** This includes workouts designed by rehabilitation therapists for each specific cognitive function. There are many recommendations, here are the main ones:

*   go in for sports. Ten minutes of low-intensity exercise on a stationary bike increases the activity of the hippocampus, which is responsible for creating new memories and remembering facts and events;
*   study foreign languages. The use of two or more languages ​​in life makes the brain more resistant to cognitive decline;
*   train your brain with games. For example, simulations and puzzles are likely to delay the onset of Alzheimer's disease and, in some cases, prevent it.

What else is important to know about cognitive rehabilitation
-------------------------------------------------------------

The brain tends to minimize the work done. And in order to stimulate him to make some kind of effort, to study or work, it is necessary to encourage him. For example, when we complete a task, serotonin is released into the blood, and we experience pleasure. This effect must be used to "deceive" the brain and "force" it to go through a long rehabilitation. That is why programs are divided into stages and successive steps: it is easier to “involve” the brain in the process and complete the rehabilitation course.

**Author:** *Svetlana Pervykh, medical director of MDinc*