---
title: "How dangerous is endometriosis and can it be prevented?"
description: More than 255 million women worldwide have been diagnosed with endometriosis, according to WHO. This disease significantly reduces the quality of life, but it can take more than one year to start treatment. About how to notice the disease in time - obstetrician-gynecologist Svetlana Markova
date: 2022-06-03T19:45:06+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-03T19:45:06+08:00
images:
- jjNK6Ef.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Svetlana Markova
interest: health
channel: 
- medicine
tags: 
---

One in ten women of reproductive age develops endometriosis, according to the International Endometriosis Association. Symptoms of this disease often reduce the quality of life. In addition, it can cause infertility. However, it takes four to ten years to make a diagnosis. The reason is that endometriosis has no specific symptoms, and some patients ignore them, considering them a variant of the norm.

How does endometriosis manifest?
--------------------------------

Endometriosis is a disease in which tissue like the lining of the uterus (endometrium) grows outside of it.

The symptoms of endometriosis are very diverse, there is not a single one that clearly indicates this particular disease. Most often observed:

*   infertility;
*   miscarriage;
*   chronic pelvic pain syndrome - regular aching pain in the lower abdomen, lumbar region;
*   pain during or after intercourse;
*   spotting bleeding between periods;
*   heavy menstrual bleeding;
*   painful menstruation.

{{< ads >}}

In addition, endometriosis [affects](https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/endometriosis/#:~:text=Endometriosis%20is%20a%20condition%20where,are%20treatments%20that%20can%20help) the emotional state of a woman: patients experience unstable mood, irritability, anxiety, phobias, insomnia and depression.

According to statistics, 20-25% of patients with endometriosis are [asymptomatic](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2941592/) . Diagnosis is also complicated by the fact that some patients do not turn to a specialist in time. As a result, they face complications that could have been avoided if they had come for a consultation at least once a year. These complications include uterine bleeding, heavy menstruation, severe pain, and (most serious) infertility.

For a complete diagnosis of endometriosis, ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvic organs are prescribed.

How is endometriosis treated?
-----------------------------

While there is no cure for this disease, doctors can eliminate the symptoms, slow down its development and improve the patient's quality of life.

Treatment of endometriosis occurs according to two scenarios: conservative (drug) therapy and a surgical method (laparoscopy). Drug treatment can be prescribed without histological confirmation of the diagnosis (when a tissue sample is examined under a microscope. - _RBC Pro_ ). It includes the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen, naproxen), neuromodulators and hormonal agents, primarily progestins. In particular, we are talking about dienogest. It blocks the reproduction of endometrial cells, helps eliminate pain and relieve inflammation. We consider this drug as a rational strategy for long-term therapy and prevention of disease recurrence.

It is important that the treatment is selected individually, based on the needs of the patient. Adequate medical therapy should be used in the long term as an effective alternative to surgical treatment unless urgently indicated.

{{< ads >}}

Surgical treatment is necessary when the methods of conservative therapy do not give the desired effect. Surgical treatment is aimed at excision of endometrioid foci, removal of endometrioid ovarian cysts larger than 3-4 cm, restoration of the function of the fallopian tubes, dissection of adhesions. Unfortunately, relapses  [are not uncommon](https://umedp.ru/upload/iblock/105/buserelin.pdf) : a year or two after surgical treatment, they occur with a probability of 15-21%, within two to five years - 12-30%, after five years - 36-47%, and after five to seven years - 50-55%.

Surgical treatment should be carried out in specialized centers where a multidisciplinary approach can be used. Foci of endometriosis can also affect adjacent organs, so the volume of the operation sometimes increases.

Can endometriosis be prevented?
-------------------------------

Despite the abundance of theories, many questions about the occurrence of endometriosis have not been clarified to date. But it is clear that this disease [appears](https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/endometrioz-i-spaechnyy-protsess-chto-my-znaem-i-chto-mozhem/viewer) as a result of the interaction of genetic, endocrine, immunological and other factors. However, there are things you can do to reduce the risk of complications. First of all, it is important to visit a doctor regularly and talk about your complaints. In addition, an active lifestyle (sports, yoga, etc.), proper nutrition, replenishment of vitamin deficiency (especially D) increase immunity and help in the fight against endometriosis.

**Author:** *Svetlana Markova, obstetrician-gynecologist of the highest category, head of the gynecological department of the polyclinic of the Joint Hospital with a Polyclinic*