---
title: "Does eye gymnastics improve vision?"
description: Can eye exercises hurt? It turns out yes. In what cases it is worth giving up exercises, and when they will be useful, said the doctor of the Ophthalmology Center of the CDC "MEDSI" - Artem Fokin
date: 2022-06-01T23:56:37+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-01T23:56:37+08:00
images:
- uXuYhmW.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Luca Iaconelli / Unsplash'
authors:
- Artem Fokin
interest: health
channel: 
- medicine
tags: 
---

Each of us has heard a lot about the benefits of visual gymnastics since school. Some consider it a panacea for all eye diseases, others - a useless practice. In this article, we will figure out in which cases gymnastics will benefit, and when it can even harm.

When gymnastics is definitely pointless to do
---------------------------------------------

Exercise will not cure nearsightedness, farsightedness, or astigmatism. This is impossible from the point of view of optics and evidence-based medicine. A well-seeing eye is in a state of emmetropia, when the image, refracting, falls exactly on the center of the retina. With myopia, this focus is in front of the retina, and with farsightedness, as it were, behind it. We see a clear picture thanks to two main parameters: the length of the eye and its refractive power. Gymnastics can not affect either one or the other.

It is also useless in diseases such as cataracts, glaucoma and retinal dystrophy. In these conditions, it is important to be regularly observed by an ophthalmologist, if necessary, to perform an operation on time and in no case self-medicate.

{{< ads >}}

In what cases does gymnastics help?
-----------------------------------

However, under some conditions, gymnastics can really positively affect vision.

Exercise allows you to:

*   increase blood flow to various structures of the eye, including the retina;
*   relieve muscle tension that can cause headaches and image defocus;
*   relax, take a much-needed break from work to improve concentration. Even five minutes of such a reboot will help you get distracted for a while and gain strength;
*   stimulate the lacrimal ducts.

Although modern screens have a much lower flicker frequency than monitors that were in the early 2000s, prolonged use of them at close range still negatively affects vision and can provoke a violation of accommodation - the ability of the eye to focus on objects at different distances. . To train it, ophthalmologists advise doing simple exercises, such as this: stretch your hand in front of you, look first at the thumb, then into the distance, at the horizon. Hold your eyes in each position for ten seconds. Repeat 10-15 times. You can also play badminton, it also perfectly trains accommodation.

However, before you start actively doing exercises for the eyes, it is better to consult with your doctor. Even such a seemingly harmless manipulation has contraindications.

{{< ads >}}

Can eye exercises hurt?
-----------------------

Ophthalmologists do not recommend doing exercises for inflammatory eye diseases, such as conjunctivitis and blepharitis, so that the infection does not get to healthy tissues along with the tear. Also, you can not do gymnastics with breaks and retinal detachment. Increased blood flow can adversely affect the condition of the eye. Exercise should be abandoned immediately after ophthalmic operations. Otherwise, there is a chance that the stitches will open or bleeding will begin.

Simple rules for maintaining vision
-----------------------------------

A modern person is constantly in a hurry somewhere, he simply has no time to do gymnastics. Here are some tips to help keep your eyesight while working at the computer for a long time.

1\. **Apply the 20-20-20 rule.** It sounds like this: Every 20 minutes, you need to take a short break of 20 seconds and look into the distance at a distance of at least 20 feet (about six meters). Some large companies even have special applications installed on their computers that turn off the screen for a few seconds every 20 minutes so that employees can rest. You can also download similar widgets to your computer or phone to control your screen time.

2\. **Use moisturizing drops and moisturizer** . During the heating season, as well as during the operation of air conditioners, the air in the room becomes dry. Because of this, the structure of the tear film may be disturbed, and a feeling of discomfort appears in the eyes. Moreover, when we work at the monitor, we rarely blink, which contributes to the development of dry eye syndrome: tear fluid is not enough to moisturize the cornea, which can lead to injury. Special drops will help to avoid this. It is important that they do not contain preservatives in their composition: they violate the integrity of the tear film, cause inflammatory reactions. If you can put a portable humidifier near your workplace, your eyes will also thank you.

3\. **Watch your diet.** As for the intake of dietary supplements for the eyes, from the point of view of modern medicine, there is nothing better than a full and varied diet. Only a doctor at the reception can determine the need for certain vitamins or medicines.

Remember, if you feel that your vision is deteriorating, it is difficult for you to focus your eyes, and there are flies or a veil before your eyes, a visit to an ophthalmologist is required.

**Author:** *Artem Fokin, ophthalmologist at the Ophthalmology Center of the Clinical and Diagnostic Center "MEDSI" on Solyanka*