---
title: "12 dangerous running mistakes that lead to injury"
description: 'It would seem that it could be easier than running. But this simplicity is deceptive: wrong technique, insufficient preparation, excessive training can lead to injuries. X-Fit expert Yulia Gulyaeva told about the most common mistakes'
date: 2022-06-05T11:29:40+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-05T11:29:40+08:00
images:
- oNBIKhQ.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Yulia Gulyaeva
interest: Health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- instructions
tags: 
---

Running, like walking, is one of the most natural movements. Modern people, however, often lead a sedentary lifestyle. Our bodies literally forget how to move: posture changes, some muscles don’t actually work, while others compensate for this and take all the load on themselves. Therefore, even such seemingly familiar actions as running, we perform incorrectly - by repeating the wrong motor pattern regularly, we overload already tense muscles, which can ultimately lead to injury.

Below are the main mistakes when running.

1\. Running from the heel or, conversely, from the toe
------------------------------------------------------

When landing, the foot should be placed on the middle of the foot, and not on the heel or toe. When a person runs from the heel, he puts his straight leg on the ground. As a result, the natural cushioning mechanism does not work and the shock load is not absorbed, but has a negative effect on the knees and lower back. As an experiment, try running barefoot - doing it from the heel will hurt, and the body itself will tell you how to put the foot.

The other extreme is toe running. It is often found among beginners who have heard somewhere that it is wrong to run from the heel. As a result, there is a “sticking” into the surface on which the person is running. This can lead to pain in the front of the leg (periosteal inflammation), pain in the knees and lower back.

{{<ads>}}

2\. Unfolding the feet outward and blockage on the inner surface of the foot
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This indicates, as a rule, the weakness of the gluteal muscles and the muscles of the foot. With this setting of the foot, the menisci and ligaments of the knee joint are primarily affected. Accordingly, in order to avoid injuries, it is necessary to strengthen the buttocks and the arch of the foot.

It is better to start training the gluteal muscles with isolated exercises - the gluteal bridge is well suited for this; then you can move on to exercises that involve more muscles. Lunges will be preferable to squats, as biomechanically they resemble a step. To strengthen the arch of the foot, it is useful to lift small objects from the floor with it, to crumple the towel.

3\. Putting the foot in front of you
------------------------------------

Ideally, when landing, the foot should be clearly under the center of gravity. However, many people run with their hips too far forward, resulting in the foot being placed in front, and the pelvis as if hanging from the back. This is due to weakness of the hip extensors (gluteal and posterior) and shortening of the flexors (iliopsoas and rectus femoris). The main reason is a sedentary lifestyle, because in the sitting position the hip joint is bent and the flexors are shortened accordingly.

To improve the mobility of the hip joint, you need to strengthen the gluteal muscles and stretch the front of the thigh. To do this, get on one knee, twist the pelvis and fix the lower back. Stretch your front knee forward without arching your lower back or tucking your knee in until you feel a stretch in the front of your thigh. Maintain this position for 15-30 seconds. Such exercises should not be performed before running - the load after stretching and relaxing the muscles increases the risk of injury. For the same reason, it is undesirable to do them immediately after running: tired muscles can send the wrong signals regarding the impact on them. Schedule a separate workout for flexibility development.

{{<ads>}}

4\. Landing on a straight leg
-----------------------------

As mentioned above, it may be associated with running from the heel. Proper technique involves landing on a slightly bent knee - this is the only way depreciation will be provided.

5\. Body tilt forward
---------------------

It is also associated with an imbalance between the hip flexors and extensors: the former are stronger and pull the body towards themselves. To eliminate this defect, it is necessary to work on strengthening the gluteal muscles and the back surface, stretching the flexors. As a result, the pelvis will protrude forward and the body will take a vertical position.

6\. Unstable body, wobbling from side to side
---------------------------------------------

Running should be economical - unnecessary movements are minimized. Rocking prevents this, since part of the effort is spent on braking the inertia leading the body to the side. In addition, amplitude movements of the body from side to side can negatively affect the lower back. Instability of the core during running is associated with weakness of the core muscles, which need to be trained. An effective exercise to strengthen them is planks. You need to start with practicing the skill in statics and only then move on to dynamic and vertical bars.

{{<ads>}}

7\. Wrong work of hands
-----------------------

It can be either excessive mobility and swinging, or tightness. Ideally, the arms move back and forth (the movement is carried out at the shoulder joint, and not at the elbow), the elbows are bent at an angle of 90 degrees. The hands are relaxed: do not clench your fists, as this creates unnecessary tension transmitted to the arms and shoulders. Waving your arms too much creates extra energy, which is bad for running economy, and inertia, which interferes with forward progress.

8\. Pinched shoulders, stoop
----------------------------

It's not just bad for running. Overstrain of the neck muscles, poor mobility of the chest make it difficult for the diaphragm, the main respiratory muscle, to disrupt the entire breathing pattern and prevent the normal supply of oxygen to the tissues. In addition, the diaphragm is connected to the pelvic floor muscles and the core muscles in general. Violations in one of the links lead to negative consequences for the whole organism - an increase in intra-abdominal pressure, malfunctions in the functioning of internal organs, insufficient stabilization of the lower back, etc. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the mobility of the chest, open the shoulders, work with breathing: this will positively affect not only running, but also the quality of life.

To start, try just breathing with one hand on your stomach and the other on your chest. Tighten your stomach slightly, and try to breathe with your chest. Feel your chest move and push your palm forward. The palm on the stomach remains motionless. Do 5-7 breath cycles (inhale-exhale). Then move your hands to your lower ribs and breathe, pushing your palms out to the sides with your ribs. These simple movements will make breathing deeper.

**In addition to improper technique, some other reasons can lead to injuries while running.**

1\. Unprepared musculoskeletal system
-------------------------------------

Running involves a shock load that you need to get used to. If you have never run before, you should start slowly, in some cases with a brisk walk, gradually adding running intervals and increasing their duration. Forcing the load can lead to pain in the ankles, legs, knees and lower back.

{{<ads>}}

2\. Neglect of other types of loads
-----------------------------------

Newly minted runners are usually so addicted that they start running almost every day, and they have neither time nor energy for other activities. Of course, running training is necessary, but you can’t do without general physical fitness either. If the muscles are not prepared, then not all of them are ready to be included in new movements. Therefore, the muscles need to be strengthened and "taught" to work so that they take the load on themselves. Otherwise, the entire load will fall on the joints and spine, which can lead to injury. In addition, it is necessary to perform special running and jumping exercises. They help to work out each phase of the running step separately, in order to then collect the correct and safe movement pattern.

Another common omission for beginner runners is the predominance of slow running in the training plan and the lack of interval work and short fast bursts. But they just have a positive effect not only on the cardiovascular system, but also on running technique, helping to avoid injuries. When you need to run fast, the body itself tells you how to do it: unnecessary movements are minimized, running becomes more economical and natural, large muscle groups (buttocks, hamstrings) are included.

3\. Overestimation of intensity and running volumes
---------------------------------------------------

Too high a load negatively affects the general condition of the body, overstrains the heart and can lead to arrhythmia and tachycardia. Overtraining is fraught with a decrease in immunity and frequent diseases, and in combination with improper technique, it can cause inflammation, sprains, and even stress fractures.

{{<ads>}}

The optimal level of load is individual and depends on many parameters: general health, diet, sleep and rest, the ability to recover from sports, the level of stress. Therefore, it is quite difficult to calculate it. You need to watch yourself and listen to your body. If you begin to get sick more often, notice a breakdown in yourself, apathy, an above-average heart rate both when performing household activities and during training, it is likely that you have overtrained. To control the load, the help of a coach will be useful, since many of these changes are easier to notice from the outside.

4\. Incorrectly selected equipment, especially shoes
----------------------------------------------------

Sneakers are something that you should not save on. You need to choose shoes according to the surface you run on. If it is rough terrain, then models with a good tread and a wide, stable sole should be considered. For asphalt, models with a higher and well-cushioned sole are suitable. If you plan to run in the winter, then choose shoes with non-slip soles.

**Author:** *Yulia Gulyaeva, X-Fit expert*