---
title: "I sleep a lot, but I still feel overwhelmed. What's wrong"
description: "Severe fatigue can prevent you from falling asleep, as paradoxical as it sounds. What other reasons reduce the quality of sleep and at what temperature to sleep, explained Tatyana Surnenkova, a somnologist and head of the Somnology Center of the Medsi CDC on Krasnaya Presnya"
date: 2022-06-14T23:41:37+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-14T23:41:37+08:00
images:
- 8OR5cO3.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Jordan Whitt/Unsplash'
authors:
- Tatyana Surnenkova
interest: Health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
tags: 
---

How much sleep do you need
--------------------------

People get the amount of sleep they need if they wake up feeling refreshed and work effectively throughout the day. How much sleep a particular person needs depends on many factors, including age. For example, babies under three months need 14-17 hours a day, while older people over 65 need only seven to eight hours. On average, adults need seven to nine hours of sleep a day.

But even if you get enough sleep, you may still feel sleepy or tired. Here are some reasons that reduce the quality of sleep:

*   chronic stress;
*   depression;
*   breathing disorders during sleep (sleep apnea);
*   restless legs syndrome;
*   grinding of teeth (bruxism);
*   taking certain medications;
*   some neurological problems;
*   heart diseases;
*   social jet lag;
*   impaired glucose tolerance.

If you feel that your need for more than nine hours of sleep, you should contact a sleep disorder specialist - a somnologist - and undergo a specialized examination in a sleep laboratory. This will help to find violations that reduce the quality of sleep.

I am very tired, but I cannot sleep. What's wrong?
--------------------------------------------------

It is extremely important to distinguish between the terms "drowsiness" and "fatigue".

*   **Drowsiness**  is a state that precedes sleep and disappears after it. It occurs against the background of insufficient sleep duration, as well as due to reasons that reduce the quality of sleep.
*   **Fatigue**  is a daily lack of energy that cannot be compensated for by sleep alone. It often appears on the background of mental or physical exhaustion, for example, due to too intense training, and also due to certain diseases, such as anemia, hypothyroidism, or cancer.

People who feel very tired can lie down to rest. However, they will not be able to sleep. But a person with severe drowsiness will immediately fall asleep as soon as he has the chance. If you suffer from insomnia, try to reduce mental and physical stress a few hours before a night's rest.

{{<ads>}}

How does bedroom temperature affect sleep quality?
--------------------------------------------------

The optimal temperature for sleeping is 16-19 degrees Celsius. This is due to human circadian rhythms - these are biological processes that repeat every 24 hours and regulate the cycle of sleep and wakefulness. Thanks to him, at night we feel sleepy, and during the day we can concentrate on important matters.

If the regime is not violated, then in the evening, when melatonin begins to be produced and drowsiness appears, the body temperature gradually decreases. And it continues to drop all night, reaching a minimum around five in the morning. Then gradually rises, preparing the body for awakening.

The temperature in the bedroom can significantly affect the quality of sleep. If the room is too hot, the time to fall asleep, the number and duration of nocturnal awakenings increase, the REM phase is reduced - the state when dreams most often occur. REM sleep is characterized by an increase in breathing and heart rate, and the body has to work especially hard for thermoregulation. In a hot room, it is more difficult for the body to cool down, because of this, a person wakes up. Such awakenings can be very short, such that you don’t even remember about them the next morning. But they can negatively affect your well-being: the next day you will be tormented by drowsiness, cognitive abilities will decrease, and irritability will appear.

If it is not possible to maintain a constant temperature in the bedroom, and the room is too hot:

*   sleep in light pajamas made of breathable materials;
*   use fan. An open window will not always provide the necessary temperature in the bedroom and, in addition, may be a source of noise;
*   take a hot bath or shower before bed to increase body heat dissipation;
*   follow the routine.

{{<ads>}}

The other extreme should also be avoided. As the body prepares for sleep, the vessels under the skin dilate, increasing blood flow and allowing heat to escape. If the environment is too cold, then this process slows down. As a result, it can also be difficult for a person to fall asleep. No matter how paradoxical it may sound, but in order to reduce body temperature, you need to warm yourself:

*   take a hot foot bath or wear woolen socks;
*   use a warm blanket and pajamas for sleeping.

{{<info>}}
6 healthy habits that will help restore drowsiness and improve the quality of sleep
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1\. Go to bed only when drowsiness sets in. Otherwise, the inability to sleep will cause anxiety and your emotional state will worsen.

2\. Remember that the bed is not a cinema or an office.

3\. Arrange an information detox two hours before bedtime: do not watch news, thrillers, stop solving work issues.

4\. Limit your caffeine intake, especially eight hours before bed.

5\. Do not forget about regular physical activity. Even, for example, a short walk on the way home from work will help improve sleep.

6\. In the morning, do not get involved in work within an hour after waking up: do not check mail, instant messengers, do not read the news. Let the body gradually wake up.
{{</info>}}

**Author:** *Tatyana Surnenkova, Head of the Somnology Center of the Medsi Clinical Diagnostic Center on Krasnaya Presnya, somnologist, doctor of functional diagnostics of the highest category*