---
title: "I want to make a training plan. What is important to consider"
description: If you exercise on your own, this has advantages. For example, you can save on the services of a coach. But to achieve the desired results in this case will not work without a plan. How to compose it, explained X-Fit expert methodologist, Panov
date: 2022-06-09T02:26:54+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T02:26:54+08:00
images:
- VZsl7tl.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Antoni Shkraba / Pexels'
authors:
- Ruslan Panov
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- instructions
tags: 
---

We define goals and deadlines
-----------------------------

Before you start making a plan, decide what you want to change about your body and how quickly. Almost everything will depend on this: frequency, types of training, intensity of exercises, number of approaches. Goals can be, for example, such.

*   Lose weight / reduce the percentage of adipose tissue

High-intensity cardio and interval training work best. During such activities, a lot of energy is spent. Frequency - 3-4 times a week.

*   Increase muscle mass
    
{{<ads>}}
In this case, the plan should be dominated by strength training. You need to do it 2-3 times a week, alternating accents: the first workout develops the whole body, the second - the legs, the third - the back, chest and arms. Two recovery workouts per week are also required, such as yoga or stretching. They will help stretch the muscles so that they do not form excessive tone.

*   Improve the quality of life (become more resilient, sleep better, eat right, recover properly after exercise)

Any workout will do. The more different formats (functional, strength, cardio and interval, recovery), the better.

*   Diversify life

You can find non-standard directions: trampolines, water aerobics, dancing, martial arts.

*   For health (so that nothing hurts)

It is worth choosing functional exercises aimed at developing stabilizing muscles. This, for example, can be Pilates.

*   Find like-minded people

Playing sports such as football, volleyball, hockey, basketball will help to solve this problem. You should also pay attention to different group classes in fitness studios or clubs. Those who attend such training often unite in communities of interest: cycling (cycling), yoga, martial arts, dancing.

Now you need to decide how quickly you want to achieve results.

*   Urgent - 2-3 months.

You will need to train 5-6 times a week: 4-5 workouts will be targeted, 1-2 will be recovery.

Important
---------

If you are just starting out, this format is not for you. It will be very difficult for an organism that is not accustomed to intense loads to recover. In addition, until the muscles “remember” the correct technique, there is a high risk of stretching the ligaments or getting another injury. you have to get used to them first.

*   Moderately urgent - 4-12 months.

Standard training process: 2-3 target workouts per week, 2-3 more recovery.

The hardest part about this is maintaining a variety of workouts. Very often, a person likes the same type of activities, and from time to time he performs similar exercises at the usual pace. As a result, the body gets used to the loads, and the effectiveness of training decreases. Therefore, it is important to change their format.

*   Not urgent - from 12 months.

In this case, a person trains based on his feelings and capabilities (time, means). Any physical activity is more useful than its absence.

If you do not set a goal and do not determine the timing of its achievement, it is very difficult to find motivation for classes. Therefore, you need to set yourself a benchmark: what weight and muscle volumes you want to achieve, how fast you hope to run five kilometers, etc. This will help to correctly calculate the required number of workouts and gradually improve performance, following the plan.

{{<ads>}}

How to train: basic rules
-------------------------

### Group lessons

1\. Be sure to tell the coach about what kind of training experience and physical limitations (illnesses, injuries) you have. This will help correct the load.

2\. Respond calmly to individual technique or intensity adjustments: the coach can encourage and encourage you to work harder to help you achieve the desired result.

3\. Try to feel the technique of the exercises: feet parallel, back straight, etc. This will avoid injuries and pain after training, as well as get a lasting effect from them.

4\. Remember combinations of exercises - they can then be used in independent training.

5\. Choose a variety of workouts, ideally try everything that is in the fitness center schedule - so you will find what you really like. The classes you like or the instructor who leads them are more than half of the motivation. If you train out of necessity, without pleasure, then each time you will find it increasingly difficult to force yourself to do it, and in the end you will leave them.

### Completely self-study

1\. Never neglect your warm-up. It consists of joint gymnastics, basic exercises (squats, planks, lunges, push-ups), pre-stretching (dynamic stretching of the main muscle groups: legs, arms, chest, back).

2\. Exercises from the main part should correspond to your level of training. If you are just starting to train, do basic movements with light weights. If you already have experience, increase the intensity or do more advanced versions of the exercises.

3\. Don't rely on fitness blogs: Finding a knowledgeable trainer among their authors is very difficult, and the risk of injury is high. It is better to use sports apps from well-known brands of clothing or equipment. They have a budget to pay for the work of experienced trainers who are able to draw up correct training programs.

4\. Practice only in front of a mirror to control your technique. Wrong technique, even in small things, is the path to injury and lack of results.

5\. Remember that the maximum intensity is allowed only in work with body weight, without equipment. Otherwise, injury.

6\. Write down a training schedule and strictly follow it. Without this, it will not be possible to achieve the set goals.

7\. For the first 5-10 workouts, it is recommended to work with a trainer to introduce the basic techniques and get acquainted with the approaches and formats of classes.

**Author:** *Ruslan Panov, expert methodologist and coordinator of X-Fit*