---
title: "A couple of hours of idleness in the morning is my secret to productivity: Jeff Bezos"
description: If you sleep for four hours a day to do everything, this is the wrong position, says Amazon founder Jeff Bezos. The businessman himself sleeps for eight hours and lazes in the morning. Thanks to this, he remains productive and does not lose focus.
date: 2022-06-03T19:55:46+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-03T19:55:46+08:00
images:
- R1aeRF8.jpg
caption: 'Photo: David Ryder/Getty Images'
authors:
- Ekaterina Brusentseva
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- business guru
tags: 
---

Today there is a lot of talk about how important it is to be aware, to live here and now. Most people have to make an effort to master this skill, but not Amazon founder Jeff Bezos. “I don't like doing several things at the same time. If I look through the mail, then I look through the mail and completely concentrate on it, ”says the billionaire, adding that this has been the case since childhood. When Bezos went to the Montessori Center, the teachers could not force him to change activities - they literally had to be lifted along with a chair and carried to the table with another game or task.

“I don’t have to specifically force myself not to be distracted by the phone \[when I’m at dinner or walking with the kids\], Bezos says. “If something serious happens, someone will definitely tell me about it.” According to the billionaire, this is not only his superpower, but also the privilege of a top manager. The higher the position, the less stress a person experiences, because he can control what is happening around, Bezos is sure.

If this is not the case, then you need to analyze the situation and find out what should be delegated in order to worry less. Managers should think about the future, at least two or three years ahead, build strategies, and not deal with operational tasks. Bezos himself, for example, does not like business trips and has done so in order to minimize their number and spend more time at home.

{{< ads >}}

Astronaut training
------------------

When a person has a calling, this is a real gift of fate, the founder of Amazon is sure. It helps to achieve goals, despite all the obstacles. For a long time, the main passion of the entrepreneur was Amazon. “I love how quickly things change here. I like that I have the opportunity to work with such strong and smart specialists, ”he explained in an interview. Such enthusiasm helped to work tirelessly.

But Bezos has had another passion all his life, which he believes found him on its own. When the future businessman was five years old, he saw on TV how Neil Armstrong landed on the moon. This picture remained forever in his heart, making him dream of someday being in space. During his high school graduation, he even said, “Space is the last frontier. We'll meet there".

Dreams of other planets not only inspired Bezos to create Blue Origin in 2000, but also forced him to change his lifestyle. Before his marriage, for example, he did not pay attention to the composition of products at all and could not boast of a healthy diet. Every morning, Bezos ate a pack of Pillsbury cookies with butter. Although he himself did not say anything about training, already in the mid-2010s, journalists began to note that his body had changed and became more inflated. Journalist Brad Stone, author of several books about Amazon, then suggested that the entrepreneur was preparing to fly into space. Last July, Bezos made his dream come true and experienced zero gravity.

As stated on the Blue Origin website, tourist astronauts must climb the launch tower (approximately seven standard flights of stairs) in less than 90 seconds and withstand G-forces. Well-known trainer Wes Okerson helped Bezos get in shape. He is a fan of low-impact exercises that have minimal impact on the joints: in particular, during classes he often uses fitness rubber bands and rowing machines.

By the way, although Bezos is said to follow a high-protein diet, the food preferences of the entrepreneur remained unusual. From the menu, he always orders the weirdest dish, like octopus for breakfast or fried iguana for lunch.

Rational analysis or intuition
------------------------------

“Any leader in the company, not just me, makes decisions after carefully analyzing the situation. And these are the best solutions!” \- Bezos said in 2004 in an interview with Fast Company. He then explained his point of view by the fact that decisions based on facts help to overcome the hierarchy in the company. As a result, even the most junior employee is able to change something in the work of the organization, convincing the leaders of the correctness of his idea. As Amazon board member Patricia Stonesifter says, when someone at the company has a good idea, Bezos always offers to measure its success with metrics.

But people change. In a 2018 interview, Bezos already says that “the best decisions are made not rationally, but intuitively, on a hunch.” And in the message to shareholders for 2019, he writes that experimental, sometimes even spontaneous actions taken at the call of the heart are very important for business. It is they who ultimately lead to discoveries and innovations.

{{< ads >}}

According to Bezos, in order to make the right decisions, the leader needs to have a good rest. To do this, you need to find harmony between work and personal life, not opposing one to the other. “If I’m happy at work, I feel better at home—a better husband and father. And when everything is fine at home, I come to work energetic - \[that is, I am\] a better employee and colleague, Bezos argues his position. \- Nobody would like to be the one (everyone has such a colleague) who, having come to a meeting, sucks the energy out of those gathered in the office. You can even feel the strength leaving. You have to come into the office and cheer everyone up.”

For the Amazon founder, the key to staying energized and productive is good sleep. No matter what happens, the entrepreneur tries to sleep for eight hours a day. Here's how he explains why: “Let's pretend I only got four hours of sleep a night. This gives me four extra productive hours a day. That is, now instead of 12 I have 12 plus four - 16 hours to work. This is 33% more than before, which means I can make 33% more decisions. Let's say 133 instead of 100. But is the game worth the candle if the quality of decisions suffers? I think no".

Bezos goes further and wonders if he even needs to make 100 decisions a day. No: he thinks for several years ahead, and a hundred bad decisions today will definitely not help him in the future. “According to Warren Buffett, it’s good if he makes three important decisions in a year. And I really believe \[that he is right\],” concludes the entrepreneur.

Every morning, Bezos sets aside a few hours to sit back and spend time the way he wants to: read the newspaper, drink coffee, have breakfast with the children. He puts the first business meeting no earlier than ten in the morning. The entrepreneur’s working day is also limited: he tries to discuss all important issues with the team before lunch, while he himself is full of energy. “By five o’clock in the evening, I can no longer think about difficult tasks. Let's try to \[talk about it\] tomorrow at 10:00," Bezos said in an interview with the Washington Economic Club. This approach, according to him, helps to perform tasks productively and maintain harmony between work and leisure.

{{< ads >}}

Go through life laughing
------------------------

Bezos is easily recognizable by his characteristic laughter: some call him discouraging, others - incendiary or even diabolical. Some Amazon employees believe that this is the entrepreneur's secret weapon. One way or another, it is very easy to make a businessman laugh. In one of the interviews, he admitted that he does not know how to be sad. And Bezos' mother told those who made him upset to wait no more than five minutes before he was amused again.

Sometimes Bezos laughs when it would never occur to others. For example, telling how he almost died after a helicopter crash in 2003: “They say that \[at such moments\] all life flashes before your eyes. This incident lasted long enough for us (besides Bezos, his assistant and pilot were on board) to have a few seconds to realize the situation. I must say, nothing profound came to my mind in those moments. I basically thought, "What a stupid way to die." Perhaps it was this resilience and optimism that helped him become a successful entrepreneur.

_Sources: Business Insider, Farnam Street, Geek Wire, Page Six, Fast Company._

**Author:** *Ekaterina Brusentseva*