---
title: "Former head of Estée Lauder: “We think in decades, not tomorrow”"
description: Leonard Lauder is the son of the legendary Estée Lauder, who turned the family cosmetics company into one of the leaders in the beauty industry. About why to thank employees and how to prevent dilution of the brand - in a selection of his statements
date: 2022-06-13T21:19:28+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T21:19:28+08:00
images:
- NOqfVmh.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Stephen Chernin / AP'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

About risk
----------

Leonard Lauder joined the family cosmetics firm Estée Lauder in 1958 after a few years in the Navy. After 14 years, he was appointed president of the company, and ten years later - CEO. The founder of the company and Leonard's mother, Este, remained the face of Estée Lauder, the father was in charge of operations, and Leonard began to write a business plan that reflected his vision for the company. “I dreamed of turning Estée Lauder into General Motors in the beauty industry, so that it had multiple brands, multiple product lines and a wide geographical presence,” Lauder shared in his memoirs.

Under Lauder, the company reached a new level of development. He created the company's first research laboratory. The entrepreneur also focused on expanding the number of Estée Lauder brands: their number has grown from two to 25 by creating new ones and acquiring third-party ones. Lauder recalls that in 1960 the company's revenue was "just over $1.75 million." By 1970, this figure reached $50 million. By 1975, the figure exceeded $200 million, and in 1986 - $1 billion. By the mid-1990s, revenue doubled to $2 billion, by the end of the 1990s, the figure doubled again, exceeding $4. billion. In 1995, he brought the company to the stock exchange. On the first day of trading, Estée Lauder rose from $26 to $34.5 per share.

Lauder says that in 1994 the company had only two brands - Estée Lauder and Clinique. And he decided to buy 51% of the Canadian brand of professional cosmetics MAC (now wholly owned by Estée Lauder). At that point, Lauder faced "absolute rejection" from other company executives because they saw it as a big risk. “But I believed in the brand and said we should buy it,” Lauder recalls. Today, MAC is one of the largest subsidiaries of Estée Lauder. “We are all creators of our future,” he writes. “Dream big.”

{{<ads>}}

Lauder is confident that he was able to achieve success because he was always looking for and open to new opportunities. Lauder believes that an entrepreneur should take risks boldly, let their imagination run wild, but at the same time stay connected to reality. “Start with yes. The future is for yes, not for no, he is sure.

Lauder shared some of the lessons that helped him take the company to the next level.

**1\. Hire smarter people and thank employees**

“There are many smarter people in the world than me, and to be useful, I do not need to be the smartest. I swore that when I retired from the fleet, I would set myself the goal of finding and hiring these people. And instead of looking at them as a threat, I will welcome and accept them,” writes Lauder. However, he warns: do not hire your best friends and classmates, because you will not be able to fire them. “Friendship is friendship, and business is business,” the entrepreneur is sure.

Lauder believed that one of his main tasks as a leader was to recognize the achievements of employees. “After all, if this person does his job so well, he makes your job easier,” he says. Lauder became famous for sending letters of thanks on blue paper to employees across the country. “People work not only for money. They work for recognition. Find a way to thank people for a job well done. If you respect the people who work for you, they will respect you,” Lauder said.

He said that when Estée Lauder went public in 1995, he convinced all members of the Lauder family to donate some of the shares to the company's employees. “These shares were not enough to buy a yacht, but enough for everyone to feel that we are all in this together,” says the entrepreneur.

{{<ads>}}

**2\. Take responsibility and be able to admit mistakes**

When Joseph Lauder (Leonard's father) was dissatisfied with something in the company and looked for someone to blame, Leonard took responsibility. “Everyone works for me. I command. So I am responsible for everything. It's my fault," he told his angry father. This is the only way to manage a company or a team, the entrepreneur believes. “As a leader, you take responsibility for the work of everyone who reports to you, even if you don’t know about it,” Lauder is sure.

An entrepreneur must also be able to admit their mistakes. “Never be afraid to admit you made a mistake. It shows that you are human and people will respect you more,” says Lauder.

**3\. Look for diversity in the team**

“Some of the best decisions for this company have been made by strong women. At its origins was a woman who gave other women products and knowledge to make them feel beautiful. Today this is called “market mirroring,” says Lauder.

One of Lauder's best employees in her life is Janet Wagner, who joined Estée Lauder in the mid-1980s and worked to expand the company's international presence. “Never make important decisions without a woman in the discussion,” he says.

**4\. Minimize losses**

“My father liked to say when he had to fire someone: “Better sharp pain at the end than pain without end,” says Lauder. That is, it is better to help an employee who does not cope with his duties leave than the company will suffer with him.

“Or if a new product doesn't sell, then you can't let the company keep losing money just because it has your precious idea in it. Admit failure quickly. Minimize your losses,” says Lauder.

**5\. Don't dilute the brand**

For those hoping to start a luxury business, Lauder's advice is to "start at the top and stay at the top." If you go down to the middle price segment, then there will always be someone who will sell cheaper. “You will have no other way but to follow them in the race to the bottom,” Lauder said. He believes that you shouldn't be tempted to sell more through a distribution channel that "doesn't fit with your brand principles."

“I have seen too many companies fail when trying to reposition their brand. Remember who you are and stick to it. Improve your brand, but do not change its positioning,” the entrepreneur advises.

{{<ads>}}

**6\. Become your own competitor**

While in college, Lauder founded the Society of Film Lovers. After selling 1,500 tickets to an 800-seat auditorium, Lauder decided he needed to compete. So he created another cinema club that offered different conditions: more experimental cinema in another room.

“I learned a valuable lesson running two movie clubs in college: you can compete against yourself and win. It was the lesson that brought the Clinique brand a decade later and ultimately influenced all thinking about the Estée Lauder brand portfolio,” he said. Clinique, a cosmetics company with hypoallergenic products, was founded in 1968. It became a competitor with Estée Lauder, which produced products more familiar to the market.

{{<info>}}
Leonard Lauder is an entrepreneur and former CEO and President of the American cosmetics company Estée Lauder.

Born in 1933, graduated from the Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania, studied at the Graduate School of Business at Columbia University. Lauder began working for the family cosmetics company Estée Lauder in 1958. He was president of Estée Lauder from 1972 to 1995 and served as CEO from 1982 to 1999 until he retired. Under Lauder, Estée Lauder bought several major cosmetic brands, and in 1996 went public on the New York Stock Exchange.

According to the [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) Billionaires Index, in March 2022, Lauder's fortune reached $29.1 billion, he is ranked 44th in the list of the richest people in the world. The capitalization of Estée Lauder is almost $100 billion.
{{</info>}}

**7\. Bet on quality and be patient**

Lauder argues that the only way to do business is to be a perfectionist when it comes to quality. “Never skimp on quality. Put your heart and soul into producing the highest quality products,” the entrepreneur advises.

{{<ads>}}

Lauder is confident that we need to work for the long term. “One of the reasons for the success of Estée Lauder, in my opinion, is that we think in decades, not tomorrow,” he says. But for this you need to be patient. “We are proud of our patience. My son William likes to use the term "patience capital". It denotes our approach to resource allocation. It often takes years for a new brand to become profitable. We understood this and invested time and money so that the brand could develop at its own pace,” says Lauder.

Some people think that a new product should either immediately make a profit, or they will have to forget about it. “After working for a while, you begin to realize that if a product makes money in the first year, it will almost certainly not make money in the future. This is a short term success. But if you hold out until the third year, the product will pay off in the long run,” says Lauder.

_Sources: Brunswick Review, The Ceo Magazine, Forbes, The Company I Keep: My Life in Beauty book._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*