---
title: "Boring, and even difficult: 6 myths about cycling"
description: Although cycling appeared in the 20th century, there are still many misconceptions about it. Do they really do it just to lose weight? And the muscles in the legs from such training will greatly increase? We deal with the experts of the cycle studio Velobeat
date: 2022-06-02T20:00:46+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-02T20:00:46+08:00
images:
- suz3f8J.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- velobeat
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
tags: 
---

Cycling is a trend in fitness that is rapidly gaining the hearts of some, but still receives a lot of skepticism from others. Let's analyze the most common misconceptions about such training.

Myth #1: Cycling makes your leg muscles bigger
----------------------------------------------

If everything in this life were so simple, then bodybuilders would not spend years in gyms preparing for competitions. Cycling is primarily a cardio workout, that is, it is not aimed at building muscle mass. It is difficult for the decay products of muscle work to linger in the body at such an intensity. But the muscles of the legs will gain tone and a beautiful relief.

To significantly increase the volume of muscles, you need to work for hours at high resistance and preferably more than one day a week. A typical workout lasts 45-60 minutes. If you are not going to spend the night in the studio, then there is nothing to worry about.

Myth #2: Cycling only works the lower body.
-------------------------------------------

Cycling is often confused with another type of exercise bike - spinning. But although they have the same basis - pedaling, there is a difference between these formats. Spinning simulates driving on the highway, therefore, it mainly uses the legs. Cycling, on the other hand, involves a load on both the lower and upper body.

Various push-ups from the handlebars, twisting the body, lifting the arms perfectly include the abdominal muscles, stabilizers and shoulder girdle. In training, they allocate time to work with dumbbells - when a person continues to pedal, but at the same time performs strength exercises. Thus, the strength of your legs alone is not enough, if only because you need to keep yourself in a straight position.

{{< ads >}}

Myth #3: Cycling is just for losing weight.
-------------------------------------------

The fact that cycling helps to lose weight is a fact. In the classroom, people really train most of the time in the aerobic heart rate zone (70-79% of their maximum heart rate). They actively breathe, sweat a lot, which means they improve the functioning of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, increase endurance. Also, due to the fact that during training the load level and rhythm are constantly changing, the strength and speed indicators of a person also increase.

Like any other physical activity, cycling is a great way to reduce stress. More on this in the next paragraph.

Myth #4: Pedaling is boring.
----------------------------

The world of fitness is constantly changing to attract as many customers as possible. And cycling is a very significant example here.

There are two main approaches to the organization of cycle training, which are used by fitness clubs and mono studios. The first focuses on achieving quantitative indicators - kilometers traveled and calories burned, and also encourages competition through various challenges. Peloton, for example, allows each user to compare their results with the achievements of the stars who use the service.

{{< ads >}}

The second approach, on the contrary, helps to concentrate on yourself, learn to listen to your body, abstract from the outside world and throw out emotions. There are no screens with distracting videos or competitions. Thanks to this, the riders get to relax. We, for example, use dim lights, loud music, and neon lights to create a party atmosphere. Cycling coaches need to constantly come up with new formats for classes and not let those who come to classes get bored.

Myth #5: Cycling is hard
------------------------

Where did this myth come from? It’s hard for a beginner to believe that you can endure a 45-minute intense workout, where you not only need to pedal, but also perform dance moves or push-ups in parallel. It seems that cycling is like a long exhausting ride uphill on a bicycle. In fact, this is not so: the rider's legs in special cycling boots are attached to the pedals of the simulator. This allows you to distribute the load evenly and avoid injury and overload of the joints.

In addition, over time, the body adapts to the loads. Here I would like to draw a parallel: without which it will not be possible to learn a foreign language - practice!

As with anything, cycling takes practice. Give your body time to adapt to the load. As a rule, it takes 1.5–2 months with regular training two to three times a week. Some beginners' studios have special classes that will help you learn how to properly set up an exercise bike and master the technique.

Myth number 6: such training has many contraindications
-------------------------------------------------------

Cycling is an intense workout, so it may not seem like it's for everyone. Especially experienced by those who have problems with their knees. But this is not at all the case: exercise bikes eliminate the shock load on the joints and help strengthen muscles.

However, cycling still has a number of contraindications:

*   hypertension;
*   diseases of the cardiovascular system;
*   varicose veins of the last stage;
*   serious or advanced problems of the musculoskeletal system.

But each case is individual. If you have any health concerns, please consult your doctor. Better with sports - such specialists are aimed at returning the patient to sports or fitness, and can suggest the most appropriate training options in a particular situation.

