---
title: "How Bollywood Helped a Shoe Store Boy Make $1.6 Billion"
description: Rafik Malik turned his father’s small shop into one of India’s biggest shoe brands. He was helped by a bet on a professional approach to store management and cooperation with movie stars
date: 2022-06-13T21:23:08+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T21:23:08+08:00
images:
- Tkz1JRb.jpg
caption: 'Rafik Malik (Photo: metrobrands.com)'
authors:
- Momot Maxim
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

Status symbol
-------------

Rafik Malik Tejani's father, Malik Tejani, [worked](https://yourstory.com/smbstory/indian-footwear-brands-metro-shoes-mumbai/amp) as a shoe salesman in Bombay (now Mumbai) before India's independence from Britain in 1947. With their withdrawal from India, the British divided the country into Muslim Pakistan and Hindu-dominated India proper. Many Muslims (but by no means all) had to leave for Pakistan. The owner of the store where Tejani Sr. worked also left. Before leaving, he sold his business to a former subordinate, which he bought by borrowing money.

Tejani named his store Metro Shoes (the business was later renamed Metro Brands). The name was inspired by the popular Metro Cinema in Bombay. As Rafik Malik later recalled, in those years, many shoe retailers chose the names of stores to create an association with cinemas. “At that time, the most luxurious thing in the city was a cinema,” the entrepreneur shares. “It was a status symbol.” This was especially true of Bombay, which became the center of Indian cinema, which began to be called Bollywood by analogy with Hollywood. As Rafik Malik recalled, his father wanted to create an inspiring brand from the very beginning, even if he did not reason then in such categories. This explains the choice of name.

Tejani generally approached the matter with great enthusiasm. He loved to sell shoes, communicated with buyers in different languages, of which there are many in India, so clients from other regions began to come to him. And in those days and with that business format (one store), sales depended mainly on the personality of the seller. In addition, Tejani had six brothers who helped him.

Rafik Malik started working in his father's shop at the age of 15. His father told him that only the owner, not a hired manager, could manage a store well, and that you couldn’t be engaged in sales unless you yourself worked in the store 12 hours a day. In 1969, Rafik Malik and his father opened a second store.

{{<ads>}}

It wasn't until 1986 that Malik Tejani [decided to](https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/from-one-shop-to-ipo-heres-the-journey-of-metro-brands/article37924098.ece) formally register his business as a company and open two more outlets. This decision was greatly influenced by Rafik Malik, who had a very different vision for the future of the company: he envisioned the business as a network of professionally managed stores. The father still did not understand how the store could not be run by his owner.

Nor did Tejani understand Rafik Malik's aspiration to switch to fixed prices for goods. Tejani was used to haggling, which was an important part of the business. And he was sure that people came to him to bargain. Tejani had a whole system for evaluating customers and setting prices in accordance with it. The same product, depending on how well dressed the buyer was and in what car he arrived, he could sell for nine rupees, and for 12, and for 15.

Rafik Malik, however, decided to get rid of this fading color. In addition, he insisted that air conditioners be installed in the stores. Customers were also given the opportunity to touch the shoes that were on the shelves (before that, they were in showcases).

Survive the 1990s
-----------------

There were some bad ideas too. So, Rafik Malik really wanted to open his own production (before that, other companies made shoes for them). The father objected, but the son could not be persuaded, so he lent him money to open a factory. Absolutely nothing came of this, the invested funds were lost. At the dinner table with his father, the businessman tried not to meet - otherwise questions would have arisen.

Rafik Malik discovered that the benefits for a shoe manufacturer are not the same as those for a retailer. “The only way to run a very successful shoe business is to produce one style, one color, one size, and in large quantities,” he says. “And as a retailer, I need hundreds of styles, hundreds of colors, and ten different sizes.” So instead of own production, Metro Brands built a wide network of suppliers.

{{<ads>}}

And the fact that their stores were in Bombay helped the business a lot and may have played a key role in its success. Father and son Tejani [managed to](https://www.forbesindia.com/article/family-business/metro-brands-big-shoes-to-fill/52597/1) meet two fashion designers for Bollywood stars. “We could provide shoes of any size, color and heel height for filming,” recalls Rafik Malik. The problem, however, was that almost 30% of films did little at the box office. In such cases, Tejani and his son did not receive payment for their work. However, it still helped the business, since the actors were, as they would say now, key influencers. In addition, Metro Brands was awarded a contract to supply Air India flight attendant uniforms. Flight attendants in India were also considered fashion models.

The country's economic policy also helped the brand. Prior to economic liberalization starting in 1991, the presence of foreign companies in India was limited by the state. Many Indian companies did not survive this liberalization, including those that worked in the footwear market. In particular, the Carona shoe brand known in the 1980s could not compete with Nike, Adidas and Reebok, which were actively promoted in the Indian market, in the 1990s. Rafik Malik, however, managed to hold on. It helped that Metro Brands never wanted to grow at any cost or overloaded itself with debt and risk.

True, in the 1990s, the reputation of Rafik Malik himself was noticeably damaged. In 1996, the entrepreneur, along with the heads of several other Indian shoe companies, was at the center of a scandal. They were [suspected](https://www.indiatoday.in/magazine/indiascope/story/19961231-cobbler-scam-shoe-firms-charged-with-misappropriating-concessionary-funds-834263-1996-12-31) in embezzlement of funds allocated for the development of footwear cooperatives in Bombay. The members of these cooperatives worked 16-hour days, living in poverty, which explained the desire of the state to help them. However, according to the investigation, at first the leaders of large companies put the cooperatives that were supposed to receive financial support under their control, and then created fake cooperatives to appropriate the allocated funds. According to the Indian media, all this became possible thanks to the conspiracy of the suspects with the politicians of the state of Maharashtra, in which Bombay is located. The amount that did not reach the cooperatives [was estimated](https://scamsleaks.blogspot.com/2014/05/cobbler-scam.html) at $ 600 million. The court has not yet made a decision on this case.

{{<ads>}}

Brand DaVinchi
--------------

Metro Brands led the conquest of the Indian market, starting with megacities. Having established itself there, the company began to promote in smaller cities. The features of the various states of India were also taken into account, which are very different from each other in language, culture and fashion, including shoes. For example, shoes with different heel heights and different colors are popular in different states. Even for different cities, the company produces different models.

By 2006, Malik had 50 stores. Metro Brands began to enter new market segments. Back in 2000, the Mochi footwear brand was launched, designed for a youth audience. In 2009, Walkway, a brand of cheap footwear for the whole family, was introduced. At the same time, the company launched the DaVinchi premium brand on the market. It was important not to give the impression that Metro Brands as a whole was moving into the lower price segment.

Of course, Rafik Malik could no longer fulfill his father's precepts and personally manage each store (now there are about 600 of them in 136 cities). He found a way out in promoting people from among the company's employees to managerial positions, instead of hiring from outside. According to the Indian media, a warehouse worker can also make a career at Metro Brands. The entrepreneur tried to create conditions for store managers as close as possible to those as if they were the owners of the stores. Their remuneration depends on how much profit their point brings.

In order to get as close as possible to what his father was talking about, Rafik Malik did not switch to the franchising model. However, recently the entrepreneur is still thinking about using franchising, at least for some brands.

Rafik Malik's daughter, Farah Malik Bhanji, became CEO in 2013 and began digitalizing the company. In particular, Metro Brands began to use barcodes on shoe boxes and launched a website. A coup was the collaboration with the stars of Indian cinema, but at a higher level than ever before. Now Bollywood stars have become brand ambassadors. Among the challenges of recent years is the need to develop online sales, which Metro Brands is also working on.

{{<ads>}}

{{<info>}}
**Market for 1.35 billion people**

The size of the Indian footwear market at the end of 2021 [is estimated](https://www.maximizemarketresearch.com/market-report/india-footwear-market/20980/) at $13.49 billion. By 2027, it could reach $27.84 billion. Rapid growth is explained both by a huge population (more than 1.35 billion people), which continues to increase, and rapid urbanization - urban residents prefer non-handicraft shoes. Among the trends are an increase in sales in online stores, as well as an increase in consumer interest in sports shoes. In terms of market capitalization (160 billion rupees, approximately $2.1 billion), Metro Brands is among the largest Indian players. The leaders are Relaxo Footwears (capitalization - 265 billion rupees, that is, approximately $ 3.5 billion) and Bata India (about 252 billion rupees, or $ 3.3 billion).
{{</info>}}

Back in 2007, Indian billionaire Rakesh Jhunjhunwala bought a 15% stake in Metro Brands. The company did not need the funds, Malik said, but wanted an external investor to oversee the case to increase business transparency.

In fiscal year 2020/21, Metro Brands generated revenue of Rs 8 billion (over $105 million) and a profit of about Rs 650 million ($8.6 million). The company was ready for an IPO, which took place in December 2021.

And Malik's father, who once bought the first store and launched the business, until the end of his days (he died in 2000) worked as a simple seller. He was sitting at the cash register in the same store in Bombay. Office work never interested him.

{{<info>}}
**View from the outside**

**"Foreign countries protect their shoe market"**

_Andrey Berezhnoy, owner and CEO of Ralf Ringer_

“Against the background of reports about the departure of some brands from the Russian market, we saw a surge in sales for the first two weeks. Part of the audience still does not know which brands are Russian and which are foreign. As a result, everyone has grown. Plus, buyers were stocking up on shoes for the future, reasonably predicting price increases. If you can do without some things, then you can’t leave the house without shoes.

In general, the departure of foreign brands is good, since the profit will remain in Russia, and will not go abroad. But the main foreign competitors of our company are still working, so there are no special changes in the footwear market. But even if they leave, we have analogues in terms of quality and design - people will quickly find an alternative, since foreign brands do not bring anything new to our segment of the shoe market.

I see the main problems in the credit and financial sphere and exchange rates. There will be no faith in credit policy without the adoption of specific measures to limit the cross-border movement of speculative capital. We will not make new investments until there is a long unsecured loan. We need stability of the exchange rate, this is the constitutional duty of the Central Bank. At the moment, the cost of domestic and imported products changes by tens of percent.

In addition, since Russia's accession to the WTO and the abolition of protective duties, the share of domestically produced footwear has not shown a positive trend and has been at the same level - approximately 25-30%. Foreign countries protect their footwear market with import duties, and we do not have a separate duty even for unfriendly countries. In my opinion, it is possible to reduce the supply of shoes from other countries by tariff regulation measures. The experience of the world market shows that if the cost of production and its marginality are equalized by the duty, then the volume of footwear production in the country is growing. What is needed is not even a protective, but a compensatory duty.”
{{</info>}}

**Author:** *Momot Maxim*