---
title: "The Biggest Selloff in Stock Market History: How to Take Advantage of It"
description: 'Many investors tend to see only the negative in the current situation. Emotions do not allow them to understand: now, probably, the only chance in life to buy securities at the very bottom has presented itself. Vladimir Turaev (Rosgosstrakh Life) - about what to buy'
date: 2022-06-08T16:08:47+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T16:08:47+08:00
images:
- fq3iBSe.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Naomi Rahim/Getty Images'
authors:
- Vladimir Turaev
interest: Investments
channel: 
- shares
tags: 
---

Sometimes emotions can take precedence over reason. It is difficult to keep a cool head when the media every day talk about sanctions, the exit of Western companies, and people around are buying sugar, salt and toilet paper. I can only sympathize with inexperienced investors who, during a total sell-off, threw off their assets at current prices in order to get into cash. Unfortunately, there were quite a few of those. The losses they suffered can be considered a rather expensive lesson. However, now it is best to stop reading the news endlessly and calmly assess the situation. With a clear eye, you will immediately see several things.

A sober assessment of the situation
-----------------------------------

First, **the reason for the market fall is outside the country.** Western investors reacted very seriously to the geopolitical situation, and this sharp reaction was expressed, among other things, in the adoption of large-scale sanctions. The sale of Russian assets was due to the fact that foreigners understood that they would be prohibited from owning securities of domestic issuers.

Secondly, **the monetary authorities were able to ensure macroeconomic stability.** There will be difficulties in the economy, but there will be no catastrophe. And stability in the economy will lead to stability in the stock market.

And thirdly, **many companies, having experienced a significant decline in their securities quotes, have remained the same stable and profitable organizations** as they were a few weeks ago.

Based on these premises, assess the situation more soberly. First of all, you will notice that inflation this year will be 20% or even more. A survey of analysts published on the website of the Bank of Russia shows a figure of 20%, but some economists consider it an underestimate. This level of inflation raises the question: what to do with the money?

Going into the currency cache and putting dollars in a box on the mezzanine would be a mistake, because the growth in prices in dollars is predicted at the level of 7-8%. And even now, those who, at the moment of panic, bought dollars for rubles at a rate of 100-110, may regret their decision. In addition, the very fate of the dollar in our country is somewhat vague: commissions from brokers, restrictions in exchange offices, rates on deposits in dollars of 0.1%. All this suggests that foreign exchange savings are not the most effective way to fight inflation.

{{<ads>}}

Opportunity time
----------------

When we see a 50–75% discount on a sale, we are always happy. I think that now the stock market is experiencing approximately the same thing as during the season of discounts: a widespread reduction in the price of all groups of goods, while their consumer value is actually preserved.

Many companies focused on the domestic consumer (such as Sberbank and Yandex), as well as issuers that will be able to change the geography of deliveries (the oil and gas sector), have fundamentally remained strong. And at the same time they are sold with a discount of up to 40%. For example, Sberbank at its peak cost 390 rubles, now its securities have fallen in price to 162 rubles. (as of April 4, 2022). At the same time, everyone understands that it is a key player in the financial market, which will maintain stable performance and withstand the negative impact of sanctions. The same statement is true for many other companies traded on the Russian market.

For those who have already been in the market, I can advise you to buy at the current level in order to balance the purchase price of securities. If an investor, for example, purchased Sberbank for 250 rubles, and now he bought in addition for 160 rubles, then the average price will be 205 rubles.

Portfolio for non-professional investor
---------------------------------------

When forming an investment portfolio in the current conditions, I advise you to invest a significant share of funds, about 60–65%, in **protective assets** . This is a standard set of instruments: federal loan bonds, reliable bonds of the largest issuers, fixed income structured products (investment life insurance policies), deposits.

The remaining 35% can be invested in promising shares of Russian companies. What papers are we talking about? As already noted, these are primarily issuers whose products and services are focused on meeting domestic demand. **The shares of Sberbank as the main bank of the country and Yandex as one of the most powerful Russian IT companies**  fully meet this criterion. In fact, for these companies the situation has not changed so much. They feel confident and continue to consistently generate cash flow in difficult circumstances.

In addition, attention should be paid to **exporters who have said that they will be able to reorient their supplies to the East** . Among these, of course, are Gazprom and Rosneft. The price situation on the hydrocarbon market is very favorable, and with gas prices around $1,500 per 1,000 m 3 and oil prices around $100 per barrel, producing companies feel quite confident. But it is important to remember that you do not need to invest every last penny. There must be a liquid part that can be used without harm to the portfolio.

The market will be supported by two more factors. Firstly, the presidential order, which was given to the government back in November last year and must be completed by July 15, 2022. We are talking about developing measures that will stimulate long-term investments in the Russian stock market. Then there were even parallels with the deposit insurance system. I think that soon we will see concrete proposals in this area. It is quite possible that these will be changes in terms of tax deductions and other protective measures.

{{<ads>}}

Secondly, the market should expect the emergence of new investment products that guarantee not only a full return of the investment fee, but also a contribution, for example, to the shares of Russian companies. That is, financial institutions can take on increased obligations to customers, and undertake to return not 100% of the invested funds, but, for example, 125%.

Of course, everyone wants to get an answer to the question - what price levels will we see at the end of the year, in a couple of years? The Central Bank, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Economy do not take the risk of making any forecasts. I will refrain from them too. However, I will remember how the situation in Iran developed. It is not entirely correct to make a direct comparison here - the structure of the Russian economy is different, the margin of safety is higher, and the state-legal system is very different from that of a Muslim country. Nevertheless, after the introduction of another package of sanctions, the local stock market of Iran grew by 600% from 2017 to 2022, thanks to the interest of domestic investors, including private ones. I repeat that the situations cannot be considered identical. But the vector of our market may be similar.

About authors

**Author:** *Vladimir Turaev, Head of Investment and Insurance Products Development, IC Rosgosstrakh Zhizn*

The point of view of the authors whose articles are published in the "Opinions" section may not coincide with the opinion of the editors.
