---
title: "Do not command, but listen: how mentoring skills help in management"
description: It is always important for the staff that the leader knows how to rally the team. However, in a period of general instability, such skills become critical. What skills will save the company from nervous squabbles? Evgeniya Lapina (Netology) reports
date: 2022-04-07T09:00:15+08:00
lastmod: 2022-04-07T09:00:15+08:00
images:
- pUti02x.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Kelly Sikkema / Unsplash'
authors:
- Evgenia Lapina
interest: management
channel: 
- modern management methods
tags: 
---

Project management is always a zone of turbulence and uncertainty, and even more so during a crisis. At such a time, the main task is to quickly reconfigure all business processes, and often it falls on the project manager. During this period, mentoring skills will be especially useful for him: they will help inspire the team and focus on the main thing.

Evgenia Lapina, the mentor of the Master’s program “IT and Digital Project Management” of Netology and the IBDA RANEPA, talks about what these skills are and how to upgrade them.

The ability to build trust
--------------------------

It is necessary that the relationship with subordinates be effective. If employees don't feel safe and trust the manager, they won't be able to talk to them about the real problems they face at work.

It often happens that the team consists of employees from different departments of the company. They may have conflicts of interest, and in a crisis, a general nervous state is added to this. For everyone to do what needs to be done, people need to feel that they can bring all their questions to the project manager for discussion.  

{{<ads>}}

**What does it look like in action?**

The main way to build trust is to practice nonjudgmental judgment, no matter what the other person says. In other words, we are talking about the need for interaction not from a “position on top”, but from a “position nearby”: in partnerships.

For example, in a situation where a task is not completed on time, there are two options for behavior. You can just openly get angry at a colleague who again failed, accusing him of being slow. And you can proceed from the fact that he did everything that depended on him, and communicate from this point. Then, instead of accusations, questions will appear: “What prevented you from completing the task on time? What could you do next time? How can I help you?"

Relationship management skill
-----------------------------

It is important that the project manager be able to build trust between team members as well. He must track conflicts, see the personal interests of everyone, compare them with the interests of the team, note who is knocked out, track changes in team dynamics: moods, relationships, roles, etc. and bring it all up for public discussion.  
  
If employees start to quarrel, you can attribute it to their bad temper. Or you can look deeper and find that someone has some personal interest and he is trying to pull everyone in his direction, and the team is resisting.

**What does it look like in action?**

To manage relationships, it is important for a project manager to maintain personal contact with the most critical team members, for example, periodically meet for a cup of coffee in order to understand how these employees live and what is important to them.  
  
In the event of tension between team members, it will be most effective to ask them what is happening now and bring them to a dialogue. Further, it must be directed, focusing on goals, and not on personal emotions.

{{<ads>}}

Ability to give developmental feedback
--------------------------------------

In order for a person to take into account their mistakes, not get stuck in resistance and shame, and remain in contact with the manager, feedback should not look like criticism. An experienced mentor knows how to give feedback so that the mentee can use it for his development. It would be good for a project manager to learn this.

**What does it look like in action?**

Positive feedback should be given: instead of finding out the reasons, focus on the experience for the future and discuss what can be done in the future, given the circumstances. Also, before you say something negative, you should praise twice and focus on the positive points.

Ability to understand emotions
------------------------------

When a project manager recognizes the emotions behind the words of a subordinate, he can highlight this and open up new perspectives or a vector of movement for the employee.

**What does it look like in action?**

One way to train this skill is to return the interlocutor his own words to make sure that he understood him correctly: “Did I hear correctly that ...?”. You can first practice in a meeting with a colleague or with any other “comfortable” person who will not be angry because they are “repeated after him”. At the end of the conversation, summarize the main ideas of the interlocutor.  
  
Another exercise to develop this skill is "Collect five yeses." The point is to get “yes” to a clarification five times a day/meeting. It is important to choose the right time and not to ask again through every sentence. For example, to clarify at the end of the conversation, summing up the conversation. Or make three reference points: at the beginning of the conversation, check whether the goal is correctly understood; in the middle - whether they left her; at the end, sum up.

Ability to ask the right questions
----------------------------------

It is important for both the mentor and the project manager to clarify the details. In particular, to see what the customer really needs, without rushing to complete the task immediately, based on their own interpretation. The same skill can be used in a team: not to give some kind of installation directly (this can cause resistance), but with the help of leading questions to help the team come to a decision on their own.

{{<ads>}}

**What does it look like in action?**

Find out the real problem of the customer. Questions will help here:

*   What will change in the company when the task is completed?
*   How will management notice results and changes?
*   By what criteria will management understand that the result has been achieved?

Ability to prioritize
---------------------

Working on a project is always a lot of work. It is important to understand what small results will make up the main result, what needs to be done in a month or a week, in what order to complete the tasks, how the completion of one depends on the other, and what information from the entire stream to pay attention to first.  
  
**What does it look like in action?**

Every day ask yourself the question: “What is important to do today in order to achieve the goal of the project?” — and do it.

Ability to be flexible and open
-------------------------------

For a mentor manager, there should be no right or wrong. What matters is what is good for the employee and his goals. For example, if the mentor has an opinion that the project should be closed, but the mentee sees other ways and believes in the project, you should not insist on your own. Perhaps the experience of the mentor is not appropriate in this situation, or the mentee has changed purpose and direction. The mentor needs to hear it, ask the right questions, and accept the situation.  
  
It is critically important for a project manager to be able to do the same: to look in depth in order to understand where and who in the team can be trusted at the moment. This helps to see resources and retest hypotheses. Working conditions, especially in times of crisis, are constantly changing. Being flexible means being able to manage change and then deal with it.

**What does it look like in action?**

See all change as an opportunity, asking yourself, “What will I learn if I support this change? What is the benefit of the changes for me, for the team, for the company?”

Ability to make mistakes
------------------------

Finally, you need to be able to support the team at the time of failure. This is how the skill to learn from mistakes develops: what have we learned? What will we do differently in the future? How the leader perceives changes and what he broadcasts in difficult situations will determine how the team will perceive them and what conclusions it will draw.

**Author:** *Evgenia Lapina, mentor of the Master's online program "IT and Digital Project Management" Netology and IBDA RANEPA, PMO Mentor and Vice President for Communications PMI Moscow*