---
title: "Three business transformation scenarios: Apple, Netflix and Lego cases"
description: 'The ability to rebuild a business under the pressure of external circumstances comes down to three main tasks: creating a plan for change, forming a philosophy, and conveying a key message. However, the approach to their implementation will depend on the specific change scenario.'
date: 2022-06-13T09:04:27+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T09:04:27+08:00
images:
- Jy4xYfM.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Hakon Grimstad / Unsplash'
authors:
- B. Tom Hunsaker
- Jonathan Knowles
interest: management
channel: 
- modern management techniques
tags: 
---

One of the biggest challenges managers face is that job responsibilities can change dramatically and unpredictably. The last two years have clearly demonstrated this. Managers had to deal with the consequences of the pandemic and organize the work process remotely. In addition, issues such as social justice, supply chain disruptions, climate change, hybrid operation and geopolitical instability are still on the agenda.

The conclusion suggests itself that the key requirements for a leader are the presence of empathy and the ability to show flexibility. Although these qualities are certainly useful, especially in times of crisis, the main feature of a good leader is the ability to act effectively in a variety of situations. True leaders are those who can adjust their management style depending on the circumstances and current problems.

There are plenty of examples in history when people showed outstanding leadership qualities in certain circumstances, but were unable or unwilling to subsequently change their approach to management. It is easy to see that, for example, a founder of a company rarely becomes a competent manager at the stage when the company becomes large - this requires a different leadership style and other skills. One of the factors behind Alphabet's success was that founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page decided to hand over the role of CEO to someone else. But today's Facebook problems are largely caused by Mark Zuckerberg's unwillingness to admit that he needs to do the same.

{{<ads>}}

Three Responsibilities of a Reform Leader
-----------------------------------------

The ability to operate effectively in different conditions comes down to three main tasks.

1.  **Plan development.** Publisher Arnold Glasgow once remarked that great leaders recognize a problem before it becomes serious. They constantly monitor changes in external factors and formulate a clear vision of where the business should go next.
2.  **Formation of philosophy.** The second task is to make sure that the leadership team goes beyond simply understanding current events. The leader must prove the need for active action and arouse enthusiasm for the improvements that the coming changes will bring. Inspiration plays a crucial role, as it is more difficult to achieve change than to maintain the status quo.
3.  **Delivering the key idea.** The plan describes the necessary changes, and the philosophy arouses interest in change. The key idea is to ensure that employees at all levels take up the implementation of the plan. It is a call to action that draws the energy of an organization around a specific goal, as well as shaping the attitude and behavior needed to achieve it.

Creating a plan, forming a philosophy, and communicating a key message are the main tasks in change management. However, the desired outcome will differ depending on the type of change that the leader seeks to achieve. Change can take three different forms:

*   strengthening the current strategy of the company;
*   rethinking the implementation of this strategy;
*   complete change of course.

Next, consider how the implementation of the plan, philosophy, and idea scheme varies depending on the type of change that the leader is trying to achieve. According to research, strengthening an existing strategy is the right decision for those 20% of companies and lines of business that demonstrate high performance in both mission fit and competitiveness. Only the 15% of companies that score poorly on both measures require a change in course. For almost 60% of companies, a prerequisite for transformation is a rethinking of the methods of implementing their strategy, and not a revision of the strategy itself.

{{<ads>}}

Strengthening the current strategy
----------------------------------

When a business performs well in terms of mission fit and competitiveness, there are two things leaders need to be wary of: overconfidence (believing there is no need to change) and arrogance (overconfidence in the rightness of one's decisions). Leaders who are able to perform effectively in a variety of situations struggle with arrogance, constantly striving for change, and arrogance, recognizing that their opinions are less important than those of key stakeholders.

The goal of the plan is to strive for excellence, focusing on existing unique features, the benefits and value of the product for customers and other stakeholders. What is needed is a philosophy to take on the challenge, either as a competitive threat or as a constant desire to improve. Finally, the task of communicating the message is to draw attention to the main priorities of the business, and not to problems that are fleeting and not related to the company's strategy.

Over the past two decades, Apple's leadership has steadily increased the scale of change. The company chose itself as the main competitor. Its mission is to strengthen its position as a leading market player through innovation and the mutual integration of hardware, software and services, all without major acquisitions (Apple's biggest acquisition ever was Beats, for which it paid $3 billion in 2014). As a result, the company has managed to maintain its unique features, deliver consistent results, and prove its value to a growing and loyal audience.

Rethinking activities
---------------------

When the goal of change is to rethink the activity, the task of the manager in drawing up the plan is to develop new routes to the previous desired result. The corresponding philosophy assumes readiness for experiments and risk. Instead of a radical change in approach, the change plan often includes digitalization, the use of machine learning and artificial intelligence technologies to improve the efficiency of existing processes. The key idea is to highlight the benefits that customers and other stakeholders will continue to receive if the ways in which these benefits are delivered are improved. This is the goal that many firms are now trying to achieve with the help of artificial intelligence.

Netflix is ​​a good example of this approach. The company still provides a convenient, personalized, and ad-free entertainment experience, even though technology has changed drastically. Netflix's management focused employees' attention on developing innovative means to achieve a goal, rather than changing the goal itself. This has maintained a sense of stability even as the business has undergone major changes in three areas: the distribution method (from DVD rental to video streaming platform); main activity (from a content distributor to a content creator and distributor in one person); transition to content development at two levels simultaneously - global and regional.

{{<ads>}}

Change of course
----------------

When a company performs poorly in both mission fit and competitive advantage, a change in course is required. In this situation, an action plan is needed to explain why a drastic change in strategy is needed and how to redefine the mission of the business.

If in the two previous scenarios of change, increased pressure from the leader can bear fruit, then in the context of a change in course, this approach is ineffective. The pressure will only increase the level of anxiety, which will prevent effective problem solving and changing existing behaviors. Instead, the challenge for a leader who wants to create the right mindset is to build faith among employees, customers, and partners in a new direction for the business and create an environment that is receptive to fresh ideas. The task of conveying the key idea is to create a feeling that it is possible to achieve the goals set.

Lego's strategic transformation led by former CEO Jørgen Vig Knudstorp is an example of how to maintain a positive atmosphere despite dramatic changes (halving the number of parts produced from 13,000 to 6,500, selling amusement parks, focusing on new technologies ) and how to properly interact with customers. If in 2004 Lego was threatened with bankruptcy, and the revenue was €800 million, then in 2020 the figure approached €6 billion.

{{<ads>}}

Most leadership texts are lists of required qualities or universal norms. But these ideals change over time and reflect the environment in which they were created. Aggressive competition (embodied in Jack Welch's famous 1980s directive to be first or second in every industry you're in) gave way to creativity (associated with Apple's slogan "Think Different") and then was supplanted by disruptive innovation (popularized Zuckerberg's motto "move fast and break barriers") and rapid scaling (he is welcomed by venture capitalists). Finally, they were replaced by the current celebration of empathy.

Which of these leadership concepts is closest to the ideal? The point is that the tasks of a leader certainly change depending on the context: attitudes and behaviors that are effective in one environment will not produce the same results in other circumstances. The form of change required (strengthening an existing strategy, rethinking a company's operations or changing its course) determines how effective leaders set and solve the problems of planning, forming a philosophy and communicating a key message. A Chinese proverb says: “A wise person adapts to circumstances in the same way that water takes on the shape of the vessel in which it is located.”

**Author:** *B. Tom Hunsaker, Jonathan Knowles*