---
title: "Tammy Erickson: Trust holds a company together like glue"
description: Why call back retired employees, what you can’t save on in a crisis, and who should be promoted in the first place - in a selection of statements by Tammy Erickson, professor of organizational psychology at the London Business School
date: 2022-06-13T21:16:02+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T21:16:02+08:00
images:
- MQUMBZn.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Tammy Erickson'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

About "collective intelligence"
-------------------------------

According to Tammy Erickson, an effective leader is not the one who takes everything on himself, but the one who knows how to involve the team in business development. Erickson believes that the era of "heroic leadership" (when the leader takes on all the work) is over and the future belongs not to one leader, but to an effective team. The researcher is sure that we should not chase KPIs and strive to reduce costs as much as possible. Instead, you need to focus on smoothly building workflows across the company. To do this, Erickson advises not to forget about innovation, which "will allow you to come up with something new or more effective."

It is especially important to pay attention to what leaders do during a crisis. Erickson noticed that at such moments, leaders unconsciously tend to shift all the work onto their shoulders. It seems to them that they should not only give orders, but also take all tasks upon themselves. As a result, the manager single-handedly reviews expenses, tightens requirements for projects and new products, redirects all key issues to higher authorities, makes sure that employees are as busy as possible, etc. Top management discusses topical issues in a narrow circle behind closed doors, and general meetings are cancelled. All this leads to the centralization of power in the organization.

{{<ads>}}

Erickson points out that in the midst of a crisis, leaders often forget that the collective mind can be a powerful support to the boss in running the business. To use this tool, Erickson advises leaders to:

1.  **Set interesting goals.** If an employee is personally interested in the success of the company, then he will work with enthusiasm. At the same time, the researcher advises setting long-term goals, and not getting hung up on everyday problems. Erickson believes that people are more likely to "dig deeper" and try to do their best if they feel that their work is vital and interesting.

2.  **Strengthen an atmosphere of trust.**Erickson advises during times of crisis not to cancel corporate meetings, increase internal competition, or cut training costs. Instead, it is necessary to encourage cooperation, support communication and knowledge sharing in the team. “It will be the glue that holds the organization together,” the researcher says. One way to build trust is to focus on adding value to each employee. Learning new skills will help employees get new career opportunities. Developing, they will "pull up" the entire company as a whole. Erickson recommends holding events where colleagues can get to know each other better. The process of adaptation of new employees in the team is especially important. Also, management should ensure that employees have access to tools that will allow them to communicate at a distance.
3.  **Continue development.**Erickson believes that business development is driven by new and unusual ideas. “Introduce provocative or out-of-the-ordinary ideas,” the author advises, while pointing out that you first need to make sure that everyone in the company is ready for possible changes. To do this, the researcher says, you need to plan to discuss ideas together, share articles about new trends, attract speakers with provocative ideas, and hire people with different backgrounds. Erickson recommends discussing innovative ideas in a team and not ignoring the initiatives of subordinates. It is also important to look for new directions for business, conduct brainstorming sessions, analyze different development scenarios, organize trainings, and experiment. In addition, the expert calls for investing in staff development. Erickson advises structuring work in the form of projects. For example, you could involve every person at every level in at least one project each year. So people will look forward to the chance to work with other people brought in from all over the company. This way they can explore ways to improve or solve a particular problem and thus learn something new.

{{<ads>}}

About a sense of security
-------------------------

Erickson also talks about how companies can help people feel safe. By security, the researcher means the opportunity to work and earn money, as well as have employment options. That is, according to Erickson, in order to hire and retain talented employees, the company must provide them with good career prospects, not only within the organization, but also in the market as a whole. To do this, companies must focus on several points. In particular, Erickson talks about how the increase in salary affects. “For example, imagine you hired someone on a salary of £50,000, and two years later that employee left you for a position with a remuneration of £70,000. This means an increase of 18% per year. This is what every new employee should be told about, ”writes Erickson.

In addition, Erickson notes that the best leaders today interact with their teams more like mentors than line managers. “Switching your managers from an evaluative to a learning mindset is one of the most important ways to retain your best employees,” the researcher adds.

Erickson pays particular attention to the possibility of rehiring departed employees, the so-called boomerangs. If employees leave in search of better working conditions, invite them back after a while, she suggests. “One company draws the name of every returnee on a real boomerang and hangs it on the wall. Thus, others see a growing number of people who have come to the conclusion that it is better where they started. This is a powerful message to those who are thinking about leaving,” writes Erickson.

{{<info>}}
Tammy Erickson is a professor at the London Business School, motivational speaker, leadership and talent consultant.

She holds a bachelor's degree in biological sciences from the University of Chicago and an MBA from Harvard Business School. Erickson analyzes changes in the labor market and focuses on how organizations can effectively engage their employees. Author of numerous articles and several books, including Workforce Crisis: How to Beat the Coming Shortage of Skills and Talent. Named one of the 50 Most Influential Management Experts by Thinkers50 four times.
{{</info>}}

{{<ads>}}

And a few more tips for leaders from Tammy Erickson:
----------------------------------------------------

*   **Focus on what will make the business iconic in the future.** Erickson advises executives to focus on the areas of the business that differentiate them from their competitors. “Ask yourself how your business will be different from the competition in 2030? Focus on this activity. Check your plan and rethink how you invest your time,” Erickson advises.
*   **Choose leaders who can create a good working environment for your team.** The researcher advises to promote those leaders in whose teams there is an atmosphere of enthusiasm and commitment to new ideas. “Look for leaders who help their subordinates grow,” says the expert.

*   **Make sure that the expectations of customers and employees match what they receive.** “Ask people why they chose to join your company and listen to the answer. Then ask people if the experience lived up to their expectations. Thus, identify the gaps, ”advises the researcher.

_Sources: Tammy Erickson website, Harvard Business Review, articles for the London Business School._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*