---
title: "“Innovation is a collective matter”: how the ex-CFO Pixar brought the company out of the crisis"
description: Lawrence Levy came to Pixar in hard times. The company had been unprofitable for ten years, and the unprofitable agreement with Walt Disney did not leave her a chance to develop. In a hopeless situation, he took the risk of betting on innovation and corporate culture
date: 2022-06-13T21:11:39+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T21:11:39+08:00
images:
- 8xTMUPz.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Lawrence Levy'
authors:
- Arina Doynikova
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

When Steve Jobs hired Lawrence Levy to work at Pixar in 1995, Pixar was not yet a world-famous animation studio. Moreover, the company barely made ends meet and existed solely on the investment checks of Jobs himself. He bought it in 1986 from Lucasfilm for $5 million, hoping to use it to develop computer graphics software. However, over the past ten years, Jobs has already spent about $ 50 million on Pixar, and it continued to be unprofitable. So he decided to hire a CFO who could take the company public and make it profitable.

Film industry from scratch
--------------------------

Prior to joining Pixar, Levy worked at Electronics for Imaging, which specialized in digital printing. He was a veteran: a Harvard graduate and a former partner at Wilson Sonsini, Silicon Valley's largest law firm. He even had the experience of creating a public company, but never before Levi had dealt with the film industry.

{{<ads>}}

To understand how Pixar lives, he decided to spend a month solely getting to know the company. “I went to all the meetings, talking to random people: developers, production accountants, technical managers, storyboard artists and other workers,” Levy recalled. Gradually it became clear that the only thing Pixar made any money from was the sale of exclusive software for 3D animation RenderMan, but the narrow market did not allow development in this direction. Also, big companies like Microsoft used the technology while ignoring Pixar's patent on it. The studio also made commercials, but their production was too expensive, so the demand was low, and the profit was almost zero. And there was no market for Pixar's Oscar-winning short films.

In his book Pixar. Reboot. An ingenious book on crisis management, Levy admitted that he would hardly have agreed to the position of financial director if he immediately understood how bad the company was doing. Although Pixar had finally sorted out its software patents, entered into a licensing agreement with Microsoft, and posted an initial profit of $3.1 million (on $10.6 million in revenue), it was too early to talk about going public.

Hope for an IPO
---------------

Although the studio was working on a feature-length cartoon for the Walt Disney Company, the terms of the contract were so unfavorable that even the huge success of the future Toy Story at the box office would not have helped Pixar to turn a profit. The contract required the company to make three films exclusively for Disney, which funded the production and received over 90% of the profits from each released film. At the same time, Pixar was obliged to pre-coordinate with her any idea and refused to work with other studios for the duration of the contract. Given that the production of the first film had already lasted for almost four years, the company's prospects for the market were grim.

The situation seemed hopeless, but Levy did not give up: “Business can be cruel, but rarely do such events really become matters of life and death. There was no need to worry about the reasons why Pixar made a bad deal with Disney a few years ago. It just needed to find a way to make Pixar thrive." Levy developed the company's first business plan and decided to try and take it public. So Pixar would have been able to at least partially pay for the production of their films - then there was a chance that Disney would agree to renegotiate the terms of the contract.

{{<ads>}}

However, before that, not a single young company went public, focusing exclusively on the film industry: for investors, this was too unreliable business model. For example, Hollywood companies released "sets" of 10-13 films so that blockbusters would pay for the production of those films that failed at the box office and reduce risks. But for an animation studio that has been working on each product for several years, this option was not suitable.

Innovation is a common cause
----------------------------

Another Pixar problem that Levy had to deal with was the difficult relationship between employees and Jobs: executives were tired of asking him for money, the writers were offended by the harsh contract with Disney, and everyone, without exception, was worried about the question of shares. Jobs encouraged workers with an option, but was in no hurry to fulfill the promise. He had recently experienced a painful "expulsion" from Apple and was terrified of parting with his stake. Levy believed that it was impossible to offend the team: “As prosaic as it may sound, I believed that the fate of Pixar depended on how many shares we allocate to the option fund. If there were too few of them, key employees would remain forever unhappy, which could destroy the culture of Pixar. Initially, Jobs was ready to offer employees only 15-20%, but for a team with ten years of experience, this, of course, was not enough.

While working at the company, Levy always paid a lot of attention to corporate culture. He considered it "an invisible force on which innovation depends." Despite the unreliable business model, Levy managed to attract three investment banks to prepare the IPO, because he did not limit himself to speeches and presentations, but invited analysts "for a visit", allowing them to see the involvement of the team, the process and intermediate results of work. Levy credited the atmosphere within Pixar with making its first feature-length animated film so successful: “We like to attribute inventor credits to individuals rather than circumstances. We assign heroes and retell their stories, while innovation is a team effort.”

{{<ads>}}

Levy had high hopes for Toy Story, which was about to be released. It was the debut of Pixar, and the results of the future IPO depended on the opening weekend box office. Levy hoped the film would make at least $10 million: “The situation was like the 100-meter sprint at the Olympics. A lifetime of training for ten seconds of competition. If people love Toy Story, Pixar will have a chance to usher in a new era of animated entertainment. If not, it will be just another company that tried but failed.”

{{<info>}}
Lawrence Levy was CFO of Pixar Animation Studios from 1995-1999 and a member of Pixar's board of directors from 1999-2006.

Prior to that, he practiced law and then was CFO at Electronics for Imaging, which specialized in digital printing. During his five years at Pixar, he managed to develop a business plan and lead a very successful IPO for the company. The last thing Levy did at Pixar was a $7.4 billion merger with the Walt Disney Company in 2006, already on the board. He then left the company and described his experience with it in the book "Pixar: Reboot" (To Pixar and Beyond). It has been translated into 13 languages, was included in the Fortune Magazine Favorite Books 2016 list, and became the top-selling book on Amazon in the business and leadership category.

Levy founded the Juniper Foundation in 2005 with his wife and former colleagues, which promotes meditation practices.
{{</info>}}

The role of the brand and trust in creative leaders
---------------------------------------------------

The $30 million opening box-office weekend of Toy Story exceeded wildest expectations, and Pixar went public with a resounding success. The initial share price was raised from $14 to $22, and on the first day of trading, November 29, 1995, they almost doubled to $39. It was this IPO that first made Steve Jobs a billionaire. The listing brought the company $140 million.

{{<ads>}}

Pixar now had the money to focus on its unfavorable deal with Disney. Here Levi was most interested in four points:

*   creative control;
*   favorable release windows;
*   50/50 profit sharing;
*   brand visibility.

Levy decided to move away from the usual Hollywood scheme and give the company the opportunity to independently approve the ideas of films. “We preferred to empower talent, to send a signal of trust to Pixar's creative leaders,” he explained. Whether you're making bottled water, mobile games, or computer chips, the decision of who controls the creative process is one of the most important decisions your team will make. Fear and ego conspire against creativity."

The first attempt at negotiation in 1996 failed, although Disney agreed to almost all terms and even allowed Pixar not to approve the ideas. The stumbling block was the brand under which future films were to be released. It was fundamentally important for the company to keep the authorship of the employees, so they refused the agreement without this clause. However, a year later, Disney unexpectedly returned and itself offered equal branding in exchange for the right to own shares in Pixar. The companies entered into a ten-year partnership contract for five animated films. Each of them came out under the Disney Pixar brand.

In addition, Levy managed to persuade Disney to include additional titles in the films that mentioned the company's administrative employees: “Everyone at Pixar should see their names there for those short seconds as the credits scroll across the screen. Even if only their families sit and watch these credits, at least for them it will be a wonderful moment, a source of long, bright personal and family pride. Disney has set only one condition: no executives will be included there. But all creative managers were involved in the production of at least one of the five films. So the only Pixar employee whose name has never appeared on the screens over the years, in the end turned out to be Lawrence Levy himself.

In 1999, he left Pixar's CFO to join the board of directors, where he oversaw the company's strategy. The last thing Levy did at Pixar was a $7.4 billion merger with the Walt Disney Company in 2006.

_Sources: Pixar. Reboot. An ingenious book on crisis management, Lawrence Levy; The Wall Street Journal; The New York Times._

**Author:** *Arina Doynikova*
