---
title: "How '90s Asos Became the Dot-Com Era's Most Sudden Failure"
description: Startup Boo.com has attracted stellar investors ranging from Bernard Arnault to JP Morgan. The company was supposed to become the main online store in Europe and sell clothes around the world. But a series of miscalculations prevented the founders from realizing their ambitious plan.
date: 2022-06-09T13:04:28+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T13:04:28+08:00
images:
- bu4R59s.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Boo.com'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
---

From the ubiquitous Asos to the more affluent Farfetch, many online retailers have capitalized on the reluctance of shoppers to shop for clothes and stand in lines at fitting rooms. However, the idea to sell clothes and shoes via the Internet appeared back in the 90s. So, the creators of the UK-based startup Boo.com counted on the fame of the first European online retailer, whose products will be bought all over the world. The young company offered services unprecedented for those times - free delivery and return of goods. Boo.com quickly captivated the public and investors, including even the head of LVMH. But the ambitious plans of the founders did not come true. And a startup that had every chance to become Asos or even Amazon of its time, turned out to be the most sudden failure of the dot-com era and closed after only a year and a half. These are the miscalculations that ruined a promising project.

That's the whole plan
---------------------

The British online store Boo.com was founded by three entrepreneurs from Sweden - Ernst Malmsten, Kaisa Lender and Patrick Hedelin in 1998. Lander is a former fashion model, including for the fashion magazine Vogue. She had already launched Bokus.com, a successful online book retailer, with Malmsten a few years earlier. Investors became interested in the idea of ​​Boo.com and imbued with confidence in entrepreneurs. The whole business plan of the co-founders was that they outlined the idea and estimated the costs. So, to launch a world-class online fashion store, they needed £20 million ($32.5 million), 30 people and three months. The company offered both sportswear and fashion, as well as merchandise from Tommy Hilfiger, Nike, Fila, Lacoste, Adidas, DKNY, Vans and Fubu. Invested in Boo.com, in particular, Bernard Arnault, head of the French luxury goods manufacturer LVMH. In addition, the company's shareholders included Italian clothing manufacturer Benetton, investment bank JP Morgan and Bain Capital. Before Boo.com even sold anything, Fortune magazine[called it](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2005/may/16/media.business) one of the most attractive companies in Europe. At the start, Boo.com was able to raise an investment of £80 million ($130 million). “This was the largest investment in an online retailer in Europe. The Boo.com lesson reminded everyone how important it is to remember the business plan,” [said](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/752293.stm.) Chase H&Q analyst Peter Misek.

The company immediately opened eight offices around the world, including Stockholm, Munich, New York, Paris and London. But Boo.com had problems already at the stage of launching the site. It was supposed to start working in May 1999, but in reality it happened only in November of the same year. In these six months, the company continued to spend the money that investors invested. The retailer increased the staff to 400 people and did not spare money on salaries. For example, Malmsten and Lander set themselves a $150,000 a year remuneration. The company spared no expense in promotion. Even before the launch of the site, Boo.com [spent](https://www.nytimes.com/2000/12/13/business/from-big-idea-to-big-bust-the-wild-ride-of-boocom.html)$25 million for advertising and PR campaigns in the hope that they will pay off. However, despite the high costs, a study by analytics firm Ipsos MORI just before the collapse of Boo.com found that only 13.2% of Internet users knew about the company, and among those who did not use the Internet, this figure [was](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2005/may/16/media.business) only 1.4 %.

{{<ads>}}

Nice but uncomfortable
----------------------

In addition, the company invested more than $6 million in the development of the site, and it required another $500,000 each month to maintain it. What set Boo.com apart from the competition was that shoppers could view each product from every angle, zoom in and out, and even use a virtual mannequin to try on outfits. Lander [hoped](https://www.nytimes.com/2000/12/13/business/from-big-idea-to-big-bust-the-wild-ride-of-boocom.html) that "Boo.com will revolutionize the world of shopping." But, as she herself later complained, "the site turned out not very good." Many users managed to make a purchase on the fourth try at best. Macintosh customers could not sign in to the site because Boo.com was not compatible with them. It was very difficult to browse the site without a high-speed connection because the bright graphics and interactive features took a very long time to load. Angry customers began calling the company's offices. Due to the poor performance of the site, the number of orders turned out to be much less than expected. When the problems became apparent, the company's management announced large discounts on goods (up to 40%).

In the end, according to Malmsten, "because the site's launch was so delayed, Boo.com spent most of the money." In September 1999 alone, the company [spent](https://www.nytimes.com/2000/12/13/business/from-big-idea-to-big-bust-the-wild-ride-of-boocom.html) $56.8 million.

Investors in a panic
--------------------

In the first six weeks since the launch of the site, the company has earned $353 thousand, but has not been able to maintain and increase the growth rate. “The average order volume was $115, which is $30 more than we originally thought,” Malmsten recalled in his book Boo Hoo: A Dot.Com Story from Concept to Catastrophe. before the disaster). Sales in the first three months of the site's operation amounted to only $680,000, while the company was [spending](https://www.nytimes.com/2000/05/19/business/international-business-boocom-online-fashion-retailer-goes-out-of-business.html) more than $1 million per month.

Federated Department Stores, which planned to invest $10 million in Boo.com, refused a week after the site [was launched.](https://www.nytimes.com/2000/12/13/business/from-big-idea-to-big-bust-the-wild-ride-of-boocom.html) from your participation. This was the first wake-up call. The company failed to remedy the situation. Investor dissatisfaction grew, and by December they forced the company to undergo a radical reorganization that resulted in the layoff of 130 people. In the past two months, Boo.com has earned just £200,000, with 300,000 visitors to the site. This was not enough to run a company operating in 18 countries. The company needed another $30 million to keep the business afloat. But by this time, the dot-com bubble had burst - the stocks of Internet companies, which had been constantly growing until then, collapsed. Banks began to refuse funding to yesterday's market heroes, and Boo.com was no exception. The company has no chance of recovery.

In the spring of 2000, Boo.com went bankrupt and ceased to exist, becoming one of the most sudden failures in the history of dot-com and the first failure of an Internet company in the UK.

{{<ads>}}

Too good to be true
-------------------

As experts noted, Boo.com's business failed because the company did not calculate the scale. She tried to build complex logistics and build a business in several countries at once. About this, the power of most computers of that time was not enough to use such an advanced site. At the time of Boo.com's launch, about 20% of British households had access to the Internet, but the connection was constantly interrupted, and page loading speeds left much to be desired.

“We were too hasty and tried to do too much, but then there were such times,” [admitted](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2005/may/16/media.business) Malmsten.

Boo.com tried to do in the clothing market what Amazon would do in the book market in a few years. But the company made the mistake of trying to cover multiple countries at once. In addition, she made a bet on technologies for which the infrastructure and consumers were not yet ready.

However, just a few months after the collapse of Boo.com, a new online clothing retailer appeared in Europe that managed to avoid the mistakes of its predecessor. We are talking about the British company Asos. Thanks to its progressive development, the company was able to successfully enter the stock market already in 2001.

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*