---
title: "It’s time to see your Psychoterapist if you see this 5 signs: Checklist"
description: Psychotherapy is an effective tool for solving a variety of life problems. But how “neglected” does the situation need to be in order to seek help? Irina Klyagina, an expert of the Cuprum publication on health and quality of life, explains
date: 2022-06-0T08:21:38+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-06T08:21:38+08:00
images:
- bI827xl.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Pexels'
authors:
- Irina Klyagina
interest: health
channel: 
- mindfulness
- instructions
tags: 
---

A psychotherapist is a specialist with a higher medical education and an additional specialization in the field of psychotherapy, who provides professional assistance in the treatment of mental illness. He treats panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, eating disorders and other problems. Can prescribe medicines to the patient or use conversational techniques in the treatment process.

A psychotherapist is not a psychologist who does not have a medical education (only a humanitarian education), and not a psychiatrist who treats severe mental disorders (for example, schizophrenia). To put it simply, a psychiatrist works with a mental abnormality, and a psychologist works with healthy people who have encountered problems.

{{<ads>}}

The world is going crazy
------------------------

According to [the National Institute of Mental Health](http://www.nimh.nih.gov/statistics/1ANYDIS_ADULT.shtml) , more than a quarter of American adults experience depression, anxiety, or some other mental disorder. In Russia, [according to official data](https://rosstat.gov.ru/storage/mediabank/Zdravoohran-2021.pdf) for 2020, there are more than 5 million people, or 3.4% of the population. Someone needs help to cope with a serious illness, lose weight or stop smoking. Others struggle to overcome relationship problems, job loss, the death of a loved one, or stress.

[WHO estimates](https://www.who.int/whr/2001/media_centre/press_release/en/) that one in four people in the world will suffer from a mental or neurological disorder at some point in their lives. Despite the availability of treatment, almost two-thirds of people with mental disorders never seek help from a health professional. Indeed, what if they “put them in a psychiatric hospital”? At the same time, WHO notes that some mental disorders are preventable and most of them are treatable. [Up to 60% of people](https://www.who.int/whr/2001/media_centre/press_release/en/) with depression can be cured with the right combination of antidepressants and psychotherapy.

{{<ads>}}

When is it time?
----------------

But, as with all other health problems, the sooner you seek advice, the [sooner you will feel better](https://psychcentral.com/blog/5-sure-signs-its-time-to-see-a-therapist/) . It may seem obvious, but all too often people let their problems go so far that it becomes difficult to resolve them.

Here are five sure signs that you need to pack up and come to the office of a psychotherapist (or psychologist).

### 1\. Something is causing serious problems in your life.

At work, at home, at school, or anywhere else, there is something that is constantly bothering you. Maybe you avoid socializing with classmates or colleagues, you feel overwhelmed, you can't concentrate. In general, if something is preventing you from functioning normally for several weeks in a row or longer, this is a sure sign that it is time to seek help.

### 2\. None of what you did helped.

Some people experience anxiety for weeks and do nothing to relieve it. Others are trying to do something. If you've already tried half a dozen different things—talking to a friend, getting more physical, looking for support online, reading about various self-help techniques, and nothing has changed—it's a sign that it's time to talk to a therapist.

### 3\. Your friends and family are tired of listening to you.

Friends and family members usually help with many things. With them we share the coolest moments in life and we roar sobbing on their shoulders. If you need to "sit on someone's ears," a friend is the best target.

But sometimes your problems can overwhelm your friends too. They begin to move away from you, do not answer messages and calls. This is a sign that you have overloaded your social support system. It's time to talk to someone whose job it is to listen and offer options to change your life for the better.

### 4\. You begin to abuse something (or someone) in an attempt to relieve your symptoms.

When things get tough, many people turn to their longtime buddies—alcohol, cigarettes, or drugs. There is nothing wrong with a glass of beer a couple of times a week, but when we feel bad, we begin to abuse "helpers". And with such self-treatment, we risk adding another disorder to existing problems.

In an attempt to make yourself feel good, you can get hooked not only on substances: social networks, pornography, gambling - anything that will drown out the problem. Worst of all, if we turn our anxiety or anger on other people, such as a loved one. Some people lash out at their loved ones or make them miserable in an attempt to feel better. Do not do it this way.

### 5\. People tell you to get help.

Sometimes we ignore the most obvious signs. Perhaps one day a friend pulled you aside and said, “Hey, is everything okay? Something is happening to you lately. Maybe you should talk to someone?" Or your wife tells you, “Listen, you need help. You're not yourself for a few weeks. It seems like all my efforts are going down the drain and things are only getting worse.”

But the casually thrown question “Are you normal at all?” \- rather a reason not to doubt yourself, but to smile and show your tongue.

**Author:** *Irina Klyagina*