---
title: "‘I don’t regret the merger’: AOL founder on ‘worst deal in history’"
description: Steve Case turned ISP America Online into one of the largest companies in the US and then became a successful venture capitalist. Why Rust Belt Cities Are Better Than Silicon Valley
date: 2022-06-13T01:07:22+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T01:07:22+08:00
images:
- IcZgipm.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Marty Lederhandler / AP'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

On the threshold of revolutionary change
----------------------------------------

Steve Case is often referred to as one of the pioneers of the Internet, as he was at the forefront of one of the largest Internet service providers in the United States - America Online (AOL). In 1985, together with like-minded people, he created the Internet services company Quantum Computer Service (later renamed AOL), where Case took the position of vice president. At the same time, Case had no experience in engineering or Internet technologies. “Looking back, I think it was even good. So I could look at the problem "How to bring the world online?" through the eyes of someone who didn't know much about technology. And it helped me see that most people are the same,” Case said.

At the time of AOL's founding, only 3% of Americans used the Internet, and these users spent about an hour a week on the Web. But even then, Case felt that the digital world has not only a commercial component. He insisted that the Internet connects people with each other and allows them to easily contact each other. “I believed in the idea. I think this is important for entrepreneurs. Leaders who really want to change the world have to have a big idea,” says Case.

Case, who became CEO of AOL in 1991, took the company public a year later. The company's market value on the day of the IPO was only $70 million, and eight years later, when it merged with Time Warner, the figure reached $160 billion.

{{<ads>}}

Head of the online world
------------------------

Case says that in addition to his role as CEO, he saw himself as "leading the online world that the company was passionately building." AOL developed rapidly, towards the end of 1999 it already had 22 million subscribers (in 1994 there were 1 million). At its peak, the company accounted for more than half of all internet traffic in the US. “But there were clouds on the horizon. One of them was the move to broadband,” says Case.

AOL management decided that a merger with a major player was a good way to diversify assets. “We considered many different options, but we always felt that Time Warner was the best option for the merger. The largest cable company Time Warner Cable (a division of Time Warner) gave us access to broadband. Also, the company had other valuable brands that are important for the development in the world of multimedia,” says Case.

Time Warner and AOL merged at the height of the dot-com boom in 2000 for a $162 billion deal. and in 2002, AOL Time Warner suffered a record loss of $98.7 billion. Although the deal was called the worst in history, Case later said of it: “I do not regret the merger, because, given the facts that I just mentioned, it was right."

Life after AOL
--------------

While still at AOL, Case took up venture capital investment. In 1997, he and his wife Jean founded an investment fund focused primarily on supporting Internet technologies, the Case Foundation. Entrepreneurs often expressed their desire to receive investments, but the founders of the fund decided that their goal was not to write checks, but to create reliability and visibility. When the interests of two people coincided, the Case Foundation introduced them. Thus, gradually they focused their efforts on developing partnerships between various industries, companies, non-profit organizations and the government.

{{<ads>}}

In 2005, Case co-founded investment firm Revolution and found that the bulk of his investments were in firms in Boston, New York, and Silicon Valley. Therefore, now Case is looking for startups in different cities of America. The entrepreneur believes that more cities need to replicate the Silicon Valley ecosystem, in which new companies attract new talent and not only create new products, but also give impetus to the creation of new industries and segments.

Case prefers to invest in businesses from Midwestern cities: a deal with a startup in Cleveland will be more profitable than in Cupertino, because there is less competition and lower costs. “You will also meet more motivated entrepreneurs,” he says. He considers passion for his work to be one of the most important qualities of an entrepreneur, which will allow him to survive difficult times with dignity. “If you don’t believe it’s worth it, then the first time you encounter difficulties, you will give up instead of fighting,” he says.

{{<info>}}
Steve Case is an American entrepreneur and investor, former CEO and chairman of the board of directors of America Online (AOL).

Born in Hawaii in 1958. In 1980 he graduated from Williams College in Massachusetts. For the next two years, he worked as an assistant brand manager at Procter & Gamble in Cincinnati, Ohio. In 1982, he moved to Pizza Hut as marketing manager. In 1985, he began working as Vice President of Marketing for Quantum Computer Services. In 1991, he became CEO of this company, which changed its name to America Online. Under Case, AOL has become the most recognizable online brand in the United States. In 2000, the company entered the list of the 500 largest US companies (Fortune 500). In 2001, at the height of its popularity, the company merged with Time Warner media conglomerate. In 2003, Case stepped down as chairman of the board of directors of AOL Time Warner.

In 1997, he co-founded the Case Foundation with his wife Jean. In 2005, Steve Case co-founded investment company Revolution. Forbes estimates Case's net worth at $1.5 billion.
{{</info>}}

The secret of success in the third wave of the Internet
-------------------------------------------------------

Case compares the development of Internet technologies with waves. The first and second waves were left behind, and now the world is living during the third wave. It began around 2016 and is characterized by the integration of the Internet into all spheres of society and, above all, into business. “In the new era, the phrase “Internet is down” will sound as ridiculous as “electricity is not available,” despite the fact that these concepts are different,” says Case. He believes that during the third wave, leaders need to adhere to the “three P's” principle: partnership, politics and persistence will lead to success.

{{<ads>}}

With regard to the first component, Case argues that "the success of an entrepreneur will largely depend on his ability to establish meaningful partnerships with organizations or individuals, which, in turn, will influence the business decisions of key executives." Speaking about the second aspect, politics, Case argues that during the third wave, government regulation of any sector of the economy becomes a necessary condition. He explains that no one wants drug manufacturers to sell drugs that are not approved by regulators, or children to eat untested foods. Nobody likes unlicensed drivers or unlicensed pilots. Therefore, the strategy of any company should also consider issues of interaction with regulators. Without interaction with government agencies, investors will feel that they are being offered a dangerous gamble. “It is impossible to count on success in such a situation. At the very least, your chances will be very small, ”the entrepreneur is sure.

By "constancy" Case means perseverance and patience in work. The entrepreneur says that for decades AOL has been in search of successful solutions, and sometimes stood on the verge of collapse. In order to succeed, the leaders of the company had to deal with hard and exhausting work. “The key to success will be a high degree of adaptability to new changes,” the entrepreneur is sure. Problems may arise with the launch of the product on the market, and with government regulators, and with partners. In other words, in order to avoid a crash, you need to be ready to constantly change some settings, bring them to mind, or even change the initial course.

_Sources: Case Foundation, Inc.com, Forbes, Startups.com, Steve Case: The Third Wave of the Internet. What qualities should an entrepreneur of the future have?_

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*
