---
title: "What Toyota did when it lost $4 billion during Great Recession and save its employeee"
description: Toyota's corporate culture is based on the Toyota Tao 2001 document, which forms the five core principles of the company. What are these principles and how the company followed them even during the Great Recession, when it lost $ 4 billion - in the book by Jeffrey Liker
date: 2022-06-09T06:27:39+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T06:27:39+08:00
images:
- DPKfOk1.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Junko Kimura / Getty Images'
authors:
- alpina
interest: management
channel: 
- team management
- corporate culture
tags: 
---

_An excerpt from the second edition of Jeffrey Liker's book The Tao of Toyota: 14 Management Principles, published by Theory and Practice._

Toyota philosophy
-----------------

Throughout most of Toyota's existence, its employees never thought about or talked about any particular Tao. It was simply the established order of things in one of the Japanese enterprises that specialized in the design and production of cars for their country. For many, the company was the first and last place of work. From the beginning until their retirement, employees literally lived in the spirit of Toyota and saw no compelling reason to document the theory behind the company's culture. However, things began to change as Toyota became a world-class manufacturer. Fujio Cho, then the first president of the Georgetown, Kentucky plant, realized that he needed to somehow explain the Toyota Way to people in other countries who were growing professionally outside the company.

The two foundations of the Tao system - respect for people and continuous improvement - are based on a foundation of five basic principles.

### Kaizen

Kaizen can be thought of as a kind of mandate to continually improve. Today, the concept of kaizen is already widely known. However, most people misunderstand its essence. Very often, the matter is limited to the creation of a special team that implements a project for specific improvements. Sometimes, if there is a need for further changes in companies, weekly kaizen events are organized to generate more new ideas. At Toyota, kaizen is not a set of projects or activities, but the way people in a company achieve their goals through scientific thinking and the constant use of Deming's PDCA cycles ("plan-do-check-act").

{{<ads>}}

### Genchi genbutsu, or "go and see to learn"

The opportunity to see something with your own eyes, of course, has its practical value (although for some reason many companies do not even do this). The true value of a genchi genbutsu lies not in the action itself ("go and find out"), but in its philosophy. Genchi genbutsu allows you to gain a deeper understanding of current conditions before making a decision or trying to implement what you consider an improvement. Genchi genbutsu has two main aspects.

First, decisions are made on the basis of known facts, not hunches, assumptions, or feelings. Second, behind the solutions are the people closest to the problem. It is they who should “go and see” and then better understand both the causes of the current situation and the possible impact of the proposed solutions.

### Teamwork and responsibility

Most companies proclaim that teamwork is essential to success, but talking about it is a lot easier than living it. Toyota believes that a person can achieve results only as part of a team, and strong teams require strong personalities. A very important condition for the success of Toyota is the principle of "point" responsibility: next to each item in any action plan, you will see the name of the person. However, in order to succeed, the responsible person needs to interact with the team, rely on collective talent, listen carefully to the opinions of all participants, work to build consensus and believe that success is the result of common work.

### Respect and development of people

In many ways, this can be considered the most fundamental of all core values. Respect for people begins with the desire to help the whole society by producing the best possible products and services. In addition to consumers, respect is certainly worthy of all employees and business partners. For Toyota, respect doesn't mean encouraging a relaxed environment where everyone works at their own pace. Toyota deliberately creates one challenge after another for its employees. The production system of the company, based on the ideas of "just in time" and andon (if the equipment fails, then a special indicator lights up for notification, if a person notices any malfunctions in the operation of the machine, then he can independently stop its work using a button or cord), allows you to identify problems as quickly as possible, which means

For Toyota, it is important that every employee is always thinking about how to improve their work processes (that is, engaged in continuous improvement). This is essential for survival in these days, when competition between automakers has become especially fierce. Accordingly, Toyota must invest in team members to become good problem solvers. It is these skills of understanding gemba, overcoming challenges as they arise, and systematically improving the PDCA model that make Toyota employees the company's most valuable asset. The scientifically based skills of constantly challenging kaizen and genchi genbutsu are naturally linked in a company with respect and teamwork.

The Great Recession and Toyota's first losses in nearly 60 years
----------------------------------------------------------------

Perhaps the most prominent example of Toyota's commitment to its core principles of respect for people and continuous improvement was during the Great Recession (2008-2009). The automotive industry began to shake even before the crisis caused by the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. The reason was the rapid rise in gasoline prices. By the summer of 2008, the cost of fuel in the US had almost doubled. After adjusting for inflation, prices were even higher than at the peak of the oil crisis in the 1970s.

{{<ads>}}

In most states, a gallon of regular gasoline cost upwards of four dollars; and in California and New York - even more than $5. This meant that now owners of large cars with their 20-gallon gas tanks were forced to shell out more than $100 for it.

Believe me, this is a significant amount for the average American, so it is not surprising that many have wondered: is it really more the better? The lack of demand for powerful SUVs has become a natural phenomenon.

However, then the market collapsed even more, and in a way completely unexpected for Toyota. By the fall of 2008, no one doubted the onset of a global recession. The credit markets were actually frozen, overnight everyone lost the opportunity to borrow money. This was a major blow to the automotive industry, as most vehicles are taken on credit. Even those few consumers who had access to loans or sufficient financial reserves to buy a car, fear of losing their jobs, postponed their purchase. People preferred not to burden themselves with debts.

Every month, Toyota sales in North America fell more and more in comparison with the previous year. By May 2009, they were almost 40% below the level of the previous year. The situation was aggravated by the fact that the value of the US dollar against the Japanese yen fell by 15% from July to December 2008. A 1% devaluation of the dollar resulted in a decrease in Toyota's operating revenue by about $36 million in monetary terms (in yen). As a result of the combined impact of a sharp drop in sales and changes in the exchange rate, Toyota lost more than $ 4 billion in the 2008/2009 financial year. Note that the company had not suffered a loss since 1950. Car sales in 2009 fell by 1.3 million units to 7.6 million. This forced many companies to close factories and lay off workers. It should be noted that General Motors lost $30.9 billion in 2008, and in the fourth quarter alone, $9.6 billion. The company's survival required US government intervention and tens of thousands of job cuts. Ford, in turn, lost almost $15 billion in 2008, by which time its total losses from 2005 to 2008 amounted to another $30 billion.

Toyota at the time had two large car manufacturing plants in the US. The plant in Princeton, Indiana, made the Sequoia and Tundra SUVs. The second production was built in 2006 near San Antonio, Texas, and was also focused on the Tundra model. Sales volumes of these models decreased by more than 40%. Nevertheless, even in such disastrous conditions, Toyota did not shut down production or lay off any of its permanent workers.

Tao in action
-------------

As soon as the company announced losses, reporters attacked me: “What will Toyota do in the current crisis situation?”, “Who made the decision to launch such a voracious car like the Tundra?” build a new plant?”, “Will the president of the company be fired?”.

The reaction of the press is not surprising - it's not every day that companies report losses of $4 billion! We all know what follows such news: executives are fired, factories are closed, employees are laid off, projects are canceled, and assets are sold off. The scenario is predictable. Unfortunately, this time too, most automakers followed suit. Take, for example, Nissan: the company abandoned the production of 12 new models and laid off over 20 thousand people. According to a report on CNN in July 2010, 300,000 people lost their jobs in the US alone due to factory closures in the auto industry. The CEOs of Chrysler, GM and Kia have retired.

In the early summer of 2008, as U.S. gas prices once again peaked, Toyota already had a month's supply of trucks and large SUVs. The company has decided to shut down factories in Indiana and Texas for three months from August to October, with the exception of manufacturing Sienna minivans in Indiana. But then came the financial crisis.

**Rejection of temporary employees**

In the winter of 2009, I decided to visit factories in Indiana and Texas to see firsthand what was happening at Toyota. None of the factories laid off permanent employees, but they had to sacrifice temporary ones. According to Toyota rules in the US, a fixed-term contract with temporary workers is concluded for up to two years, and then these people are either transferred to the state or say goodbye to them. They provide a buffer that allows Toyota to provide permanent workers with lifetime employment. During the crisis, the company had to abandon the services of all temporary workers.

**Downtime training**

Both plants have predetermined what they will do during the three-month downtime. Group leaders organized training for shop workers. In addition, intensive kaizen activities were planned, which could significantly improve performance once normal operations resumed. (Looking ahead, the recession prevented them from making full money right away.)

{{<ads>}}

**Transition to day shift**

All workers were transferred to the day shift. While some were working in production, others were studying and doing kaizen. So, at a plant in Indiana, while team A performed their direct labor duties for half a shift, team B practiced kaizen. Then they changed each other.

**Pay cuts and unpaid Fridays**

I learned that a month earlier, all managers voluntarily waived bonuses and agreed to a pay cut (although this was not declared everywhere). When this was not enough, the company was forced to make Friday a non-working and unpaid day.

**Rejection of third-party contractors**

What struck me most during those visits to the factories was how busy everyone was around. People literally ran from place to place. Each worker had an individual schedule for attending various events in his spare time from production. The main reason was that Toyota decided to use this period to move production of the Tundra to Texas and the Highlander SUV from Japan to Indiana. To realize their plans, everyone had to work hard, especially in Texas. In Indiana, in order to save money, engineering contractors were taken away from a significant part of the work on the launch of the product. Employees reconfigured equipment themselves wherever possible, allowing Toyota to cut out third-party services and cut costs even further.

Workers learned how to reprogram robots to extend the life of old models instead of buying new ones.

One of the team leaders explained what was happening then: “No circumstances will force us to quit our jobs and live on welfare. This is the main difference between Toyota and other companies. We invest in our own development in order to think more professionally. I don’t think anyone on the outside can appreciate the importance and uniqueness of such an investment by Toyota.”

{{<ads>}}

After the launch of new products, the work of factories in Indiana and Texas got on the usual rails, and over time the company even resumed the practice of hiring temporary workers. The experienced and dedicated employees that Toyota managed to retain during the recession have been excellent mentors and coaches for newcomers. However, not everything ended so rosy.

NUMMI, a joint venture between Toyota and General Motors in Fremont, California, fell victim to the recession and bankruptcy of General Motors. In June 2009, this legendary factory was closed. After recovering from bankruptcy, General Motors returned some assets, but decided to abandon the joint venture with Toyota. The Japanese manufacturer had to choose: become the absolute owner of NUMMI or put an end to it. After painful discussions and attempts to find a new partner, Toyota nevertheless liquidated the plant. At the same time, the company did everything it could to pay workers severance pay, although the legal agreements did not provide for this.

