---
title: "Money Loses Efficiency Over Time: John Adair on Motivation"
description: When it’s better to say goodbye to a subordinate right away, what is the main secret of a successful presentation and what are ten time management tips to take note of - in a selection of statements from leadership expert, Shell and Mercedes consultant John Adair
date: 2022-06-13T13:00:50+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T13:00:50+08:00
images:
- jMW1GFW.jpg
caption: 'Photo: From the personal archive'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

How to get the most out of your team
------------------------------------

Adair says that employee motivation is one of the most important success factors for the entire company. Therefore, an effective leader is responsible not only for the team to work together, but also for the motivation of each individual employee, which will bring out the best in a person. The author offers several tips to help motivate his subordinates to action.

*   **Be motivated yourself.** Adair claims that this is necessary to motivate others because she is contagious like a virus. “Never ask others to do what you are unwilling to do yourself. A good example is the only real means of influencing others. Be ready to experience moments of inspiration when you say or do exactly the right thing, ”advises the expert.

*   **Choose already motivated people.** Adair says it's important to recruit people who have the skills the company needs. “There is no point in motivating a person if he is not suitable for this job,” the author notes. He reminds that people are good at what they like, and they like what they can do. And you should pay attention to this. Adair emphasizes that the principle of selecting those who are already motivated applies to all employees, not just managers or those who work directly with clients.
*   **Set challenging but realistic goals.** The concept of "task" includes its difficulty, because if it is easy, then it cannot be called a task. The leader must clearly understand the goals of his organization and break them down into tangible, time-bound and, if possible, measurable tasks.
*   **Remember that progress motivates.** Adair argues that employees should see the progress that the company is making through teamwork, because this will serve as an impetus for new achievements. The author says that people can learn about progress through feedback. Without it, the team will not know that it is moving in the right direction and at the right speed. “The reverse is also true: feedback about the relative lack of progress is also motivating. It helps to focus on thinking about what needs to be done to achieve success, ”adds the author.
*   **Treat each person as an individual.**“To get the most out of each person, you must first see him as a person, not as a boss or subordinate, customer or supplier. Because each person is important as an individual in itself and as a means to a common goal,” says Adair. To do this, Adair recommends that leaders talk to each employee personally and listen to everything they have to say. This will help to understand the natural source of human motivation and start working with it. Inefficient employees deserve special attention from your side. “Ask each such worker why he does not achieve the agreed goals. Find out what motivates him at the moment. Talk to him. It is possible that together you will come to the conclusion that he chose the wrong job for himself, ”Adair points out.
*   **Provide fair remuneration.** Achievement should be associated with rewards in the same way that promotions should be associated with merit. When remuneration is not enough, employees will not show due diligence. It should be borne in mind that the motivational effect of money is quickly lost. Money remains an external factor, while long-term motivating factors are inherent in the nature of the job itself.

{{<ads>}}

*   **Express approval.** Most people value recognition and approval. They look for it when they know they've done something extraordinary beyond what their duties require. Recognition can be expressed formally and informally, but it must be genuine and sincere. Public recognition, for example at a meeting, strengthens it.

How to manage time wisely
-------------------------

Adair is sure that competent time management increases the efficiency of the company. He gives ten tips for better time management.

1.  **Develop a personal sense of time.** Adair advises to observe and record in detail how you spend your time for one or two weeks. “Analyze and review how you organized, planned, used and spent your time in the five days and propose specific actions by which you are going to increase the effectiveness of your work in this direction. For example, compare how you actually spent an hour and how you planned to spend that hour in light of your current goals and aspirations in your work,” the expert advises.
2.  **Define long-term goals.** Adair emphasizes the need to understand your life goals. They determine how the leader will allocate and spend his time. “Do an annual review \[of the goals\], set aside a certain amount of time for this. Think of them as the stars along which you direct the course of the ship of your life, ”the author recommends.
3.  **Make medium term plans.** Medium-term planning for some companies may cover three to four months, and for others a year or two. The plan is created for the performance of work, that is, it must not only be drawn up, but also implemented. It should contain a limited and feasible number of goals and objectives. It is necessary to describe in detail what steps must be taken to complete the task. “When you have thought everything through from beginning to end, then try to comprehend what was written, going from end to beginning. This will help you avoid missing important steps,” advises Adair. A good plan should always answer the questions: who, when, where, how, what, why?
4.  **Plan your day.** “Write down on a piece of paper the things that you need to do every day, put the things in order of completion or number them according to priorities. Summarize the results of each day, noting successes and analyzing the reasons for failures, ”advises the expert. The purpose of the plan is to free you from the pressure of time and help you work and live with dignity.
5.  **Try to make the most of your best time.** “Your best time is when you work best. For most people, this is early morning,” the expert says. Many people know from experience that solutions to problems come when we "fall asleep with them." Creative ideas often come when a person is working in the early morning. “Be prepared to meet them like a fisherman waiting for a fish to bite,” Adair advises.
6.  **Organize your office work.** The author advises to pay attention to the office and create an environment for productive work. For example, Adair recommends cleaning up your desk at the end of each day and getting it ready for work the next day. All the necessary tools should be at hand so as not to look for them. In addition, it is important to practice being able to read and write documents quickly, which will save a lot of time.
7.  **Schedule meetings.** In order for the workshop not to turn into a useless meeting, it is necessary to determine the goal for yourself and plan everything carefully: determine the composition of those present, send out the agenda and all the necessary materials. Adair advises setting a time limit in advance and starting the meeting on time. For each of the items on the agenda, it is necessary to allocate a strictly defined time. “End meetings on a positive note, summarizing decisions made and necessary actions agreed upon,” Adair recommends. It is important to review regular meetings from time to time to make sure they are needed and that the right people are present.
8.  **Delegate authority and tasks effectively.** Failure to delegate tasks eats up time. Delegation implies the transfer of initiative and authorship to other persons to perform a certain range of tasks. For quality delegation, the subordinate must have the qualifications to do the job, as well as the willingness to do it. The supervisor is left with control over the execution of the task, as well as checking the quality of work. In this case, the leader and subordinate share responsibility for the successful completion of a common task. Delegation is rewarded by the fact that subordinates grow as professionals: it reinforces recognition, respect and trust in the team.
9.  **Use the rest of your time.** It happens that a person does not use all the time assigned for any business. The remaining time can be effectively used for other needs. Adair pays attention to the waiting time. He claims that it brings with it additional features. During this time, you can send letters, discuss the task, make a plan, etc.
10.  **Watch your health.** The author recalls that health determines how efficiently a person works. “Conserve your energy and improve your health with a proper diet, good sleep, and regular rest,” Adair recommends. The author advises learning to recognize the symptoms of stress and identify the factors that accompany it.

{{<info>}}
John Adair is a British scientist and professor.

Adair is the creator of various leadership models. He is the author of over 50 books on leadership in business, military and other fields. His books have been translated into 18 languages.

John Adair has worked with directors and senior managers as a consultant for various international companies including Shell, ExxonMobil Chemical, Mercedes-Benz and Unilever. Since 2006, he has been Honorary Professor of Leadership at the Pudong Leadership Academy (China). In 2009, he was appointed Head of Leadership Studies at the United Nations in Turin.
{{</info>}}

{{<ads>}}

How to make a successful presentation
-------------------------------------

Adair identified several factors that influence the effectiveness of a presentation. In particular, the expert says that when preparing it, it is important to take into account the circumstances, the audience and the place, and based on this, build a speech plan. The first step is to clarify for yourself which activities to participate in and which not. “You have to know the boundaries of your business, and within those boundaries, you have to imagine your area of ​​expertise,” says Adair.

The presentation needs to be structured - to outline the main points, supported by facts. It is very helpful at the very beginning of your presentation to define your goal or goals and explain why you think they are important. Therefore, you yourself must be clear about what you are achieving and why it is so important.

The expert says that the recipe for a successful presentation is rehearsal. It helps to gain confidence before the performance. It is also important to focus on good presentation, which requires oratory skills such as clarity, simplicity, brilliance, and naturalness. “Follow the main thoughts, and the words will come,” recommends Adair.

_Sources: John Adair website, London Business Forum interview, John Adair Effective Leadership. The art of managing people and yourself._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*