---
title: "Stablecoins are gaining popularity. How will they change the economy?"
description: 'Stablecoins are considered not only a more stable cryptocurrency, but also more controllable, which attracts the attention of states that are increasingly implementing them. We are looking into whether they can bypass traditional crypto and become an important part of the global economy.'
date: 2022-04-19T07:52:20+08:00
lastmod: 2022-04-19T07:52:20+08:00
images:
- DU7NdOH.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- Karina Karimova
interest: Investments
channel: 
- Crypto
tags: 
---

In the cryptocurrency market, which is replete with a wide variety of coins, there is a special type of asset - stablecoins, which both crypto enthusiasts and the authorities call the future of the economy. These coins are backed by real money, so they are less volatile than other cryptocurrencies.

{{<info>}}
_**Stablecoins**_ - (from the English Stablecoins: Stable - stable, reliable, coins - coins) - a class of cryptocurrencies backed by real assets. They can be pegged either to a particular currency, such as the US dollar, or securities, or to commodities, such as gold.
{{</info>}}

The rise in popularity of stablecoins is due to their nature - they combine the world of cryptocurrencies, offering instant transactions, security and privacy of payments, with the traditional financial system, providing price stability. As [of September](https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/ifdp/files/ifdp1334.pdf) 2021, the volume of funds in stablecoins based on public blockchains pegged to the dollar reached $130 billion, while the growth for the year was 500%. Now the entire volume of stablecoins [is estimated](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/06.03.2022/stablecoin-cryptocurrency-needs-congressional-regulation/) at $180 billion.

The high volatility of cryptocurrencies, in particular bitcoin, makes them almost unsuitable for everyday use. If a coin takes on the function of a currency, then it must retain its value over time so that people can use it as a means of payment. With their relative stability, stablecoins compare favorably with other cryptocurrencies.

{{<ads>}}

### There are four main categories of stablecoins:

*   Stablecoins backed by fiat (real) money or commodities, such as Tether (USDTUSD) and TrueUSD (TUSDUSD).
*   Stablecoins backed by other cryptocurrencies. Usually, the amount of the reserve in this case exceeds the number of stablecoins due to the strong volatility of cryptocurrencies. The Dai coin is powered by Ethereum.
*   Algorithmic (unsecured) stablecoins. They do not have reserves but operate under a mechanism similar to central bank regulation. Such coins are focused on smart contract algorithms (programs that automatically monitor and ensure the fulfillment of contract obligations by the parties) that maintain price stability. Popular algorithmic stablecoins are Ampleforth (AMPL), DefiDollar (DUSD), and TerraUSD (UST).
*   Central bank digital currencies - CBDC (Central Bank Digital Currency), coins that are issued by the state financial regulators of countries. The digital yuan, the Petro coin in Venezuela, work.

Experts call stablecoins a safer alternative to cryptocurrencies, which could [reduce the cost of the payment process](https://hbr.org/2021/08/stablecoins-and-the-future-of-money) for businesses and simplify various types of money transfers. Stable cryptocurrencies can potentially bring to the global financial system that part of the population that currently does not use banking services or is not sufficiently covered by them.

At the moment, there are several directions for the introduction of stablecoins. In **digital markets** , coins [are used](https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/ifdp/files/ifdp1334.pdf) to trade digital assets and provide a “transition” from fiat currency to digital assets.

In **the payment system,** stablecoins are used to provide fast and cross-border peer-to-peer (person-to-person) payments. As such, they also hold the potential for innovation in payments.

In **the process of internal transfers** , institutional stablecoins facilitate the transfer of funds within companies, allow the efficient movement of internal cash through subsidiaries to manage liquidity risk and regulatory requirements.

In the **decentralized finance (DeFi)** system, stablecoins power cryptocurrency markets and services. The protocols on which they operate allow the provision of market-making, collateral lending, asset management and other services.

However, without a solid legal and economic framework, there is a real risk that the stability of stablecoins will be shaken. “They can collapse like a flimsy currency board, crash the dollar like money market funds in 2008, or simply become worthless. Stablecoins can repeat the turmoil that reigned in the banks of the 19th century,” Christian Catalini, a cryptocurrency and blockchain researcher, one of the creators of the Libra (now Diem) coin, and Jai Massari, a lawyer working with financial institutions, [argue in their article.](https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/ifdp/files/ifdp1334.pdf)

{{<ads>}}

How governments launch stablecoins
----------------------------------

*   In Venezuela, the state introduced the Petro coin, which is used along with the national currency, the bolivar.
*   China has a digital yuan. It is the official digital currency of the country. Transactions with his participation [exceeded](https://hbr.org/2021/08/stablecoins-and-the-future-of-money) $5.3 billion.
*   The United States is actively studying the technology of stablecoins and is developing a program for the introduction of a digital dollar. The Biden administration [believes](https://pro.rbc.ru/news/622a257b9a794787efc57edb?from=favorites) that the development of this direction is a strategically important goal for the country to maintain dominance in finance.
*   India has said it will issue a digital rupee as early as 2022-2023.
*   Russia has already [begun](https://www.cbr.ru/press/event/? id=12685) testing the digital ruble this year.

According to the International Monetary Fund, about 100 countries in the world are now developing their own digital currency.

Are stablecoins real cryptocurrencies or digital versions of fiat money?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Stablecoins, which appeared in the mid-2010s, belong to the category of cryptocurrencies, but, unlike them, such coins are not decentralized. There is always a company that controls them. Ultimately  , the Tether token [is believed to be](https://theconversation.com/stablecoins-these-cryptocurrencies-threaten-the-financial-system-but-no-one-is-getting-to-grips-with-them-171690) [controlled by](https://theconversation.com/stablecoins-these-cryptocurrencies-threaten-the-financial-system-but-no-one-is-getting-to-grips-with-them-171690) the owners of the Bitfinex crypto exchange, USD Coin is owned by an American consortium consisting of the payment provider Circle, Bitmain and the Coinbase crypto exchange. The Binance USD token is [owned by](https://theconversation.com/stablecoins-these-cryptocurrencies-threaten-the-financial-system-but-no-one-is-getting-to-grips-with-them-171690) the Binance cryptocurrency exchange.

But the main idea of ​​cryptocurrencies is to create an independent alternative to the traditional and regulated financial system.

Virtual currencies by their nature should be decentralized, and the mechanism of their functioning should be transparent and understandable to all network participants. Therefore, most cryptocurrencies run on the blockchain, which makes all this possible.

The peculiarity of stablecoins gives rise to their contradiction: on the one hand, these are cryptocurrencies, but they are not decentralized. Some experts point out that stablecoins are a natural evolution of the combination of public and private money in an economy.

{{<ads>}}

Regulation of stablecoins
-------------------------

Stablecoins, like cryptocurrencies in general, are under scrutiny from regulators given the size of this market and the potential impact on the financial system. In October 2021, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), which brings together the national securities regulators of different countries, [stated](https://hbr.org/2021/08/stablecoins-and-the-future-of-money) that stablecoins should be regulated as financial market infrastructure, along with payment systems and clearing houses.

According [to](https://hbr.org/2021/08/stablecoins-and-the-future-of-money) Christian Catalini and Jai Massari, with a reasonable approach to the regulation of stablecoins, they can become a reliable financial instrument with minimal risks. Experts note that, as a rule, control over reserve assets and the issuer, as well as restrictions on risky actions to transform maturities, are generally considered normal requirements in the framework of stablecoin regulation. Legislation should be considered to support the segregation of reserves and the claims of coin holders in the event of an issuer's bankruptcy or insolvency. Laws should be [aimed at protecting](https://hbr.org/2021/08/stablecoins-and-the-future-of-money) consumer rights, financial stability and preventing financial crime, experts believe.

Catalini and Massari propose that the state follow a “hybrid” model of working with stablecoins: first introduce regulation, and then, having studied the successful and negative experience in this practice, start issuing its own digital money (CBDC). Countries that follow this strategy will be more likely to meet the needs of the population and businesses faster and see a new generation of financial institutions flourish, the [researchers said](https://hbr.org/2021/08/stablecoins-and-the-future-of-money) .

Possible impact of stablecoins on the financial system
------------------------------------------------------

If stablecoins were to become widespread in the financial system, they could have a significant impact on the balance sheets of financial institutions, according to Gordon Liao, a former US Fed senior economist now at Harvard, and John Caramichael, a Fed researcher [.](https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/ifdp/files/ifdp1334.pdf)

For example, the researchers concluded that the use of secured stablecoins in lending—replacing physical currency (banknotes) with these coins—has the potential to increase the amount of loans issued.

US Deputy Treasury Secretary Nelly Liang [believes](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/06/stablecoin-cryptocurrency-needs-congressional-regulation/) that stablecoins pose an increased risk to consumers and may even threaten the stability of the financial system. Ironically, it is the expectation that stablecoins will maintain a constant value that can make them dangerous in times of stress, she says.

“If at any point, stablecoin holders panic that they won’t be able to convert their tokens into dollars, they can try to cash out quickly. Perhaps at first there will be several of them, then others may connect, and soon a mass exit from the token may begin, ”says Liang.

{{<ads>}}

To meet this demand, issuers will have to sell the assets backing their coins. This could [lead](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/06/stablecoin-cryptocurrency-needs-congressional-regulation/) to a sell-off of traditionally safe securities, damaging critical parts of the financial system, she said.

The Deputy Secretary of the Treasury believes that if stablecoins replace checks or credit cards in the future, then any disruptions associated with digital wallets or other mechanisms that support the use of tokens for payments will be devastating.

In addition, she notes the risks associated with possible interactions between stablecoin issuers and large commercial enterprises. For almost a century, US law prohibited commercial companies from controlling banks.

Potential of stablecoins
------------------------

Gordon Liao and John Carmichael [are sure](https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/ifdp/files/ifdp1334.pdf) that the cryptographic security and programmability of stablecoins will not only help them to develop the traditional financial system, but will also contribute to serious innovations in general.

In the future, stablecoin technologies may have diverse implementations and drive innovation in several areas of growth: more inclusive payment and financial systems, tokenized financial markets, and facilitating microtransactions for technological advances, the researchers say.

“One could imagine, for example, a search engine or video streaming platform powered by near-instant stablecoin micropayments instead of ad revenue and user data sales. If this shift in web services takes hold, it will likely lead to further development and growth of stablecoins,” experts say.

**Author:** *Karina Karimova*