---
title: "Glasses, lenses, surgery: which method of vision correction to choose"
description: About a quarter of the world's inhabitants have vision problems, according to WHO estimates. But how to correct them? Ophthalmic surgeon, doctor of medical sciences Tatyana Shilova analyzes the main methods and talks about their advantages and disadvantages.
date: 2022-06-06T11:06:53+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-06T11:06:53+08:00
images:
- MjbyC3g.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Tatyana Shilova
interest: health
channel: 
- medicine
tags: 
- dr shilova clinic
---

Today, in addition to the standard methods of correcting refraction - glasses and contact lenses - laser vision correction has also gained great popularity. The choice of one or another method depends not only on the patient's personal preferences, comfort and aesthetics, but also on medical indications. Some people cannot wear contact lenses, others are not suitable for surgery.

To choose the best option for yourself, you should compare the strengths and weaknesses of each vision correction method.

Glasses
-------

This is the most common and the "oldest" way to improve vision. His doctor will suggest in the first place. Then, with medical indications and your desire, recommendations are given on the selection of contact lenses.

Looking ahead, I will answer why laser correction is not immediately offered. The procedure can be performed on a patient whose vision does not deteriorate sharply over time. Therefore, at first the doctor will monitor the dynamics, as a rule, for six months or a year. Then, if everything is fine and there are no other contraindications, it is permissible to perform the operation.

### Pros

*   **No special care required.** It is enough to be careful with the frame and keep the lenses clean.
*   **No risk of developing infections.** The use of glasses does not involve contact with the eye and mucous membrane, it will not be so easy to bring dirt and germs from the hands, so you can not be afraid of inflammatory diseases. In addition, goggles protect the eyes from foreign particles in windy weather.
*   **Durability.** Glasses have no time limits for use, only breakage or personal preferences can prompt you to change the frame.
*   **Price.** In the long run, glasses are cheaper than contact lenses because they don't need to be changed often or taken care of.
*   **UV protection.** Ultraviolet radiation is very dangerous for the eyes. Thanks to the photochromic lenses that are used in glasses, its effect can be leveled.

### Cons

*   **Discomfort when playing sports.** Training with glasses is not very comfortable, in addition, the risk of injury increases.
*   **Distortion of peripheral vision.** With peripheral vision, a person constantly sees part of the frame, which can interfere and annoy.
*   **Influence of weather conditions.** Glasses fog up when moving from the street to a warm room, and rain and snow leave drops on the lenses - this is also a certain discomfort.
*   **Appearance.** Due to circumstances or beliefs, not everyone is ready to accept themselves with glasses. The issue of aesthetics plays a big role here.

{{< ads >}}

Contact lenses
--------------

There are several types of contact lenses available today, from disposables to extended wear lenses that can be used for up to six months. There are also lenses for people with astigmatism and night lenses - they are worn at night and act on the eye, changing the shape of the cornea, so that a person sees well during the day. Therefore, choosing the best option for yourself is not so difficult.

### Strengths

*   **The ability to lead an active lifestyle and engage in almost any sport without discomfort.** This is the most important difference from glasses and the main advantage over them. No foggy or dirty lenses or broken frames.
*   **Unlimited field of view** . If the glasses can be seen with peripheral vision, then the lenses exclude such a defect.
*   **Stealth.** The fact that you are wearing lenses is extremely difficult to understand, no one will suspect that your vision is not perfect.
*   **Lenses are not afraid of weather conditions.** Rain, snow, dust, temperature changes will not cause discomfort.

### Flaws

*   **The process of putting on and taking off.** If this minus is put on the scales against the possibility of leading an active lifestyle, the scales will balance. For some people, the procedure is uncomfortable, but for some it is impossible: you need to pull back the eyelid, touch the eyeball with your finger - this is what repels many.
*   **risk of bacterial contamination.** If you do not follow the rules of hygiene, then it is easy to bring dirt and germs. In addition, the likelihood of developing inflammatory processes is high.
*   **wearing mode.** Contact lenses interfere with the natural processes of saturating the eyes with oxygen and moisturizing them. If you wear them longer than expected, this can lead to corneal hypoxia and dry eye syndrome.
*   **Special care.** To prevent the development of bacteria on the surface of the lenses and subsequent infectious diseases of the eyes, they should be stored in a special case with a disinfectant solution, the case itself should be washed with the same solution daily.

### Contraindications

It is forbidden to use lenses for people with chronic inflammatory diseases and eye injuries, strabismus, allergic reactions to lenses or solutions for them. In addition, they are contraindicated in corneal dystrophy, dislocation of the lens and some diseases, such as glaucoma, cataracts, dry eye syndrome.

I would like to complete the comparison of glasses and contact lenses with a caveat: you should not compare them in terms of effectiveness. They give the same degree of refraction. If the patient is shown both lenses and glasses, he already decides what suits him best, based on personal preferences. The combination format is very popular: for example, glasses are used at home, and lenses are put on before going to work or school. An absolute plus of this format is the absence of discomfort and the prevention of possible complications.

Laser vision correction
-----------------------

It is a micro-invasive procedure, meaning it involves minimal surgical intervention. The operation allows you to restore your full vision and no longer use glasses or contact lenses. The procedure is performed on an outpatient basis and lasts no more than 15-20 minutes, including instructions. The operating time of the laser varies from 25 to 60 seconds depending on the correction method.

Today, you can be offered several correction methods - PRK, LASIK and ReLEx SMILE. The method is selected individually, taking into account the characteristics of each patient.

{{< ads >}}

*   **PRK**  , the first generation of laser surgeries, has many disadvantages compared to later techniques. This is a relatively weak effect, and a long recovery period, and subsequent restrictions for life. Today it is mainly used in the case of additional correction or reoperation.
*   **LASIK**  is the second generation, already a more comfortable option for the patient: all restrictions are removed after a month. But it is contraindicated in patients with thin corneas and those whose lives are associated with high loads, such as professional athletes and the military.
*   **ReLEx SMILE**  is the third and by far the most advanced generation of the procedure. It has a minimum of contraindications, and the restrictions are removed the very next day - you can drive a car, return to sports training, swim. The only disadvantage of the method is that the operation is mainly designed for people with myopia (nearsightedness). Research is underway to adapt ReLEx SMILE for patients with farsightedness. In certain cases, it is already available to them.

Laser vision correction has an alternative - **phakic lens implantation** . They are placed directly inside the eye and correct vision. This method is used with a high degree of myopia, say -18, and when laser treatment is not possible due to corneal pathologies, such as keratoconus.

**An undoubted plus of laser correction**  is the restoration of vision and the rejection of glasses and lenses, which significantly improves the quality and comfort of life. But there are also a number of disadvantages:

*   relatively high cost of the procedure. On average, vision correction in one eye using the LASIK method costs from 70 thousand rubles, ReLEx SMILE - from 100 thousand rubles. But it is much cheaper than, for example, in European clinics, which attracts medical tourists from abroad to Russia;
*   laser correction is not available to patients with vascular, autoimmune and immunodeficiency conditions and diseases that reduce the body's ability to recover. These are, for example, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, AIDS. In addition, corneal pathologies will be contraindications;
*   sometimes the patient after the operation requires additional correction, that is, a second procedure is necessary. In some cases, this can be predicted even at the diagnostic stage, in others it turns out after the operation. Modern methods of correction practically reduce the statistics of repeated operations to zero: after ReLEx SMILE, additional correction is needed in 2-3% of cases, after LASIK - in 8-20%, after PRK - in 10% of cases.

**Author**: *Tatyana Shilova, MD, Professor, leading Russian ophthalmic surgeon in the field of laser correction ReLEx SMILE, chief physician of the network of ophthalmological clinics "Clinic of Dr. Shilova"*