---
title: "Bumble CEO: “I’d rather jump and fall than stand on the edge forever”"
description: Last year, Bumble dating service founder Whitney Wolf Heard became the youngest self-made female billionaire. Why a businesswoman decided to go against Tinder, how she searched for her niche and learned not to be afraid of anything - in a selection of her statements
date: 2022-06-13T15:38:35+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T15:38:35+08:00
images:
- XkdRt29.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Bumble'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

No business thoughts
--------------------

Whitney Wolf Heard in her youth did not even imagine that one day she would become an entrepreneur. She wanted to work in marketing and advertising because she felt that she had the ability to do so. But she was not accepted to the desired direction at the university, and she eventually chose the Faculty of International Relations. “It turned out to be the best option for studying marketing: here we studied globalization, international politics, sociology, psychology, anthropology. And most importantly, we learned to understand people. And that's the basis for all consumer products, whether it's Bumble, Tinder or whatever," Hurd says. According to her, the only way to make a product popular and make it work is to understand the consumer, and for this you need to know the cultural characteristics of each region.

The entrepreneur says that after university she had no idea how to create a dating app. She planned to "explore the world" - she spent several months in Southeast Asia, doing volunteer work. “And while I was there, this moment of insight happened! I realized that it doesn’t matter what you do – help people, travel, build a business; but if you don't have access to technology, you have nothing. It was then that I decided to go to work in the technology field, ”said Hurd. However, at that time she did not yet know what problem she wanted to solve.

{{<ads>}}

A start
-------

In 2012, Hurd took a job as a sales and marketing manager at Hatch Labs startup. There she met a young entrepreneur, Sean Red. During an employee hackathon, Red and programmer Joe Munosom created the Matchbox dating app. Wulf was a co-founder; it was she who first realized the potential of the service and persuaded her colleagues to develop this project, which turned into Tinder. It was Hurd who came up with the name of this platform. In 2012, she became VP of Marketing for Tinder. “I worked there for two years, I understood a lot, learned a lot about consumer behavior, about what women lack in the digital space; and that, in fact, became the basis that led to the next chapter of my life, ”said Hurd.

In June 2014, she left Tinder and sued the company, accusing her former boss Justin Mateen of harassment, threats and creating an unhealthy work environment. “In the end, I left when 200-400 thousand new users came to the platform per day. I had to go against the company at a time when no young woman would want to participate in the lawsuit,” says Hurd. Tinder denied the allegations, but Mateen was suspended and later left his post. The lawsuit ended with a settlement agreement, in which, according to media reports, an amount of about $1 million appeared.

Due to the Tinder scandal, Hurd has faced a wave of insults and threats on the Web. “When I left Tinder, the whole world called me names, said that success is not about me and I'm just a girl who wants attention. I knew it wasn’t, but I was shocked that my contribution was being misinterpreted,” she says. Against the backdrop of this scandal, she began to have panic attacks.

{{<ads>}}

Everything from scratch
-----------------------

Then Hurd moved from Los Angeles to Texas. To get over the trauma, she began to look for a way to use the experience in a new project. And I thought about what example I can set for other women and girls. I had to show that if you were knocked down, you could get up right away, Heard thought. She started working on a social network for women called Merci based on the idea of ​​positive emotions. “No compliments about appearance,” says the businesswoman. “Only compliments about what people are like.”

While the entrepreneur was building a plan, Andrei Andreev, the founder and CEO of the dating service Badoo, contacted her to invite her to the position of marketing director. “At that moment, I had to really make a big decision. I had opportunities through the experience of the last few years, through what I've learned in my career, and I really could make a difference. And I felt like it was my only choice, so it really became an inspiration, ”says Hurd.

Hurd was not going to go to work at Badoo, but shared the idea of ​​Merci with Andreev. He supported the idea of ​​​​a brand focused on women, but advised to develop in what she is an expert in - dating applications. The case ended with the fact that she accepted Andreev's offer: he invested about $10 million in promoting a new company called Bumble, and received a 79% stake. Hurd, who became CEO of the company, owns 20% of the shares.

A distinctive feature of Bumble was that only women could be the first to write messages. The application was launched in December 2014 and in the first month it was downloaded more than 100 thousand times. “People write that Andrei was a simple investor or was important only at the beginning. But it's not. He and I built this company together from day one, and without him there would be no Bumble, just as there would be no Bumble without me,” Hurd notes.

{{<ads>}}

Jump and take off
-----------------

The service began monetization through paid features in August 2016. In 2017, sales exceeded $100 million. In November of the same year, Forbes valued the company at more than $1 billion and called the service the fastest growing in the United States.

In 2019, Andreev sold control of MagicLab, which includes Bumble, to Blackstone investment company. The entire company was valued at $3 billion. Hurd became the CEO of MagicLab. As of 2020, Bumble had over 100 million subscribers worldwide. Hurd says that if at first the application was focused specifically on the needs of women, then the focus in positioning shifted to equal and healthy relationships in general. “I was just trying to be true to my long-standing ambition to create a safer and more reliable platform for meeting people. And this principle is like a guiding star, it answers all my questions, ”says Hurd.

Bumble went public on the NASDAQ in February last year. The initial price of the placement was $43 per share, but soared immediately to $76 after the opening of trading. “I'm not obsessed with quotes,” Hurd said at the same time. “I am obsessed with the clients, the team, the innovations we are planning for the future.”

Hurd, who owns 11.6%, or 21.54 million, of Bumble shares, became the youngest female CEO whose company went public in the US. “I think investors are really excited about having a woman at the helm, and also that for the first time in the dating app space, there is a company that is really focused on building a brand, mission, and driving a product,” Hurd explained the success of the IPO. .

{{<ads>}}

{{<info>}}
Whitney Wolf Heard is the founder and CEO of dating app Bumble.

Born in 1989 in Salt Lake City. At the age of 11 she moved with her family to Paris, where she graduated from high school. Then she entered the Faculty of International Relations at the Southern Methodist University in Texas. In 2012, she co-founded the dating service Tinder. In 2014, she left the company and founded the female-focused dating app Bumble. The company completed an IPO on the NASDAQ last year. Bumble's revenue for that year grew by 42% and reached $766 million. Bumble's capitalization exceeds $5 billion.

In 2017 and 2018, she was featured in the Forbes 30 Under 30, a list of "entrepreneurs who are changing the face of business and society" who are under 30. Last year, Forbes named her the youngest female self-made billionaire (estimated at $1.6 billion at the time).
{{</info>}}

Courage to take a step
----------------------

Hurd believes that no successful entrepreneur has ever woken up and said, "I want to be an entrepreneur." Rather, it all started with the fact that he defined the problem that he really wants to solve. The best entrepreneurs in the world are those who solve specific problems because they want to make the world a better place. This is the winning formula, ”Heard is sure.

Hurd believes that several factors must converge for a business to be successful: "There are a lot of companies that have a great marketing team but a bad product, or an incredible product and bad marketing." She is sure that the main thing is to work for the long term: “If you are trying to achieve an ambitious goal, do not focus on the short term. Stay true to the long-term vision."

{{<ads>}}

Hurd believes that in business, the main thing is to start acting. “Don't be afraid, don't get hung up on 'what if...' because the real failure is not to try. And trying and not achieving success is not a failure, ”the entrepreneur is sure. She emphasizes that you just need to start somewhere and then it will be easier. “Historically, many women have been discouraged from just going for it. We were seized with fear and "what if ...", we were told: "Keep a low profile, be modest, quiet." But just start somewhere and go,” Hurd advises. She believes that the path to success begins with the simplest steps, such as "writing your idea down on a piece of paper, hanging it on your bathroom mirror, and staring at it for two weeks." “This is the first step,” Hurd says.

In fact, according to the founder of Bumble, how a person deals with fear determines their success. “I think people are held back by fear of the unknown and failure,” she says. \- As for me, I'm more afraid of complacency than the fact that something will not work out. I'd rather jump and fall than stand on the edge forever." She admitted that she is afraid of a lot of things, but every day she tries to challenge herself by doing something that scares her, because "90% of the time it's not as terrible as it seems."

_Sources: Thought Economics, Forbes, GQ, Vogue, Fortune, CNBC._

*Author:* *Olga Kiseleva*