---
title: "How to work less and be more productive: 4 tips"
description: Overwork and burnout are almost something to be proud of today, but in fact, this approach only harms cognitive abilities. Productivity coach tells you where to find time for important tasks if the hours in the day are over
date: 2022-05-27T01:18:37+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-27T01:18:37+08:00
images:
- ia5AeEq.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Donna McGeorge
interest: health
channel: 
- brain
tags: 
---

Have you noticed that you began to hear the phrase "I'm busy" more often? Many companies value the ability of a person to quickly cope with tasks and adapt to new conditions. But in reality, such firms squeeze all the juice out of employees, forcing them to give everything to the limit, and this ends in stress and burnout of employees.

In a culture that values ​​hard work and productivity, we are said to "win" when we work our hardest. When we are constantly busy, we feel more useful and needed, and this feeling can be addictive. We even feel guilty or ashamed if we are constantly, even on weekends, not busy with work tasks.

Business literature, articles, and podcasts often point out that successful people work harder than everyone else. They get up at 4-5 in the morning to get more done - although in fact, studies show that the more we sleep, the happier we become.

Constant hard work and lack of rest harm your abilities. Pain, stress and fatigue stimulate the production of neurotransmitters (physiologically active substances that transmit signals between nerve cells. ), which impair cognitive abilities.

{{<ads>}}

Your brain will be more productive if you learn to switch and give yourself more time to rest. To perform at your best, you need commitment, contentment, and peace of mind. Here are some tips on how to achieve this.

Leave 15% of the time for yourself
----------------------------------

In industrial production, there is such a thing as capacity utilization. This means the difference between actual production and maximum production capacity. Usually plants do not work at 100% - 85% is considered the optimal volume. Thus, there is a reserve of 15% in case of overlays, such as equipment failure or lack of resources for production.

The same applies to your brain. To optimize the resources of your mental systems, you need to work at 85% capacity.

Here is an example: track and field athlete Carl Lewis. He won Olympic gold nine times and was known as a finish master. In the 100-meter sprint at the 40-meter mark, he often went last, but then he swept past his rivals in a whirlwind and came first. While the rest of the runners had to strain their last strength - their fists were clenched, their faces were distorted by grimaces - Lewis looked as calm as he had at the beginning of the race. He overcame it all at 85 percent of his power.

{{<info>}}
_**Tip:** Set a buffer 15% out of your day or week. Leave 1.2 hours out of an eight-hour workday; in total, this is one working day of the seven-day week. For example, start by planning ahead for public holidays (especially if you're self-employed). Spend this time reading or otherwise relaxing. At first glance, this approach may seem counterintuitive, but in the long run, this habit will positively affect your mental abilities._
{{</info>}}

Focus on your biological clock
------------------------------

Have you ever noticed that by the evening you become less patient and attentive? Some little things in meetings and conversations start to annoy because you are tired and your level of mental energy is declining. This is not the best state for making decisions or for productive discussions.

Brain wave research shows that innovation, inspiration and intuition are only available to a person in a certain state. Accordingly, the more cognitive "charge" you save, the better.

For most people, the most productive time is in the morning. Therefore, important decisions and tasks that require attention and concentration (what we call “real work”) are best done in the morning. And routine work like answering letters can be postponed for the evening.

{{<ads>}}
{{<info>}}
{{}}
_**Tip:** prepare in the evening for tomorrow morning. When you finish work, plan two or three tasks in advance for the morning and do them the next day without starting anything_ _else_ . Make the most of your most valuable time.
{{</info>}}

Run meetings in 25 minutes
--------------------------

You can't do without meetings at all - they are needed in order to determine the course of action, make decisions and allow the company to move on.

So the problem is not the work meetings themselves, but the fact that people leave a slot of 60 minutes for them by default. And thus we lose at least 35 minutes waiting for latecomers, solving technical problems and trying to figure out the purpose of the meeting.

Keeping a meeting under 25 minutes helps participants focus and spend time on only what matters. Time constraints make it necessary to identify two or three key topics for discussion and start doing something faster.

{{<info>}}
_**Tip:** Change the automatic duration of meetings on your calendar to 25 minutes instead of 60. Always be clear about the purpose of the meeting. When you receive an invitation to a meeting, say that you only have 25 minutes and explain why you need to attend. If there is no reason or it is not clear, politely decline._
{{</info>}}

Simplify
--------

When faced with a problem, we tend to complicate it rather than simplify it. For example, we make even more appointments to figure out why our work schedule is so busy, which only makes things worse. When there is no free time left, we start getting up earlier and going to bed later to do everything. But what if you just reduce the number of tasks you take on?

{{<ads>}}

Think about what limits you should set for yourself and create a list of what you won't do. For example, do not go to social networks during the working day, do not set meetings before 10 am or after 3 pm, or stay at work until late.

{{<info>}}
_**Tip:** Take a look at your current to-do list and cross off the tasks that bring little value, take a lot of energy and distract from your real goals. This frees up time to do the really important things. You will be surprised how much effort these secondary tasks used to take before._
{{</info>}}

Thus, if you want to grow fast, be successful, and “get everything on the fly,” stop overloading yourself with work and achieve your ambitious goals at a calm pace, without forgetting about the rest.

###### This material was first published in Fast Company magazine or at [https://www.fastcompany.com/](https://www.fastcompany.com/) . The original article can be read at the link. © 2021. All rights reserved. Material courtesy of Tribune Content Agency.