---
title: "Sooner or later you will find yourself in a “bubble”: ex-head of BCG - to managers"
description: In 2021, Rich Lesser was named America’s Best CEO. Why is the eighth year more difficult for the CEO than the first, what is the essence of the “five-year test” and what is important to remember about life priorities - in a selection of his statements
date: 2022-06-13T15:35:38+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T15:35:38+08:00
images:
- H14BTDH.jpg
caption: 'Photo: BCG'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

About life in a bubble
----------------------

Lesser joined the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) as a consultant in 1988 and became the company's CEO in 2013. During his last three-year term as head of BCG, Lesser found himself in a bubble. “When you are at the top of the hierarchy, you have a lot of influence over your subordinates. People intuitively begin to say what they think you want to hear, what fits your worldview or makes you happy,” explains Lesser.

According to him, the "bubble" is formed slowly, because at first colleagues perceive the leader almost as an equal, they know who he is and where he comes from. But as time goes by, the gap between the CEO and everyone else “starts to open up,” people start to carefully watch what they say, “and the walls of the ‘bubble’ get thicker.”

This is what happened to Lesser. More and more often, partners began to come to him with a request to discuss a topic that they considered important - climate change. The company had already worked with clients on projects in this area, but Lesser recalls his colleagues "relentlessly" urging him to move faster in this direction and mobilize all the company's resources to do so. “In the end, I came to the conclusion that those people who challenged me turned out to be right,” he agrees. “It's not that we didn't take it seriously. There's just a difference between taking it seriously and putting all the energy of a firm like BCG into it," says the former CEO of BCG.

{{<ads>}}

Lesser recalls that this episode was decisive and helped change the trajectory of BCG development. According to him, this "bubble" around the leader bursts when he admits that he was wrong, and his colleagues were right. And this has a long-term impact on the direction of the company and the corporate culture. So Lesser insists on creating an environment where the CEO encourages discussion, singles out people who disagree with the CEO, thanks them, and shows how the company has changed as a result. Lesser believes that "from the fourth to the eighth year you need to work harder than in the period from the first to the fourth" in order to achieve trust with subordinates.

According to Lesser, the diversity of ideas and opinions in the company will help not to be isolated. It is necessary that completely different people work in it. Perhaps many prefer to agree with the leadership, do not want to challenge him and fight back, but the more diverse the team, the more different points of view. This helps create an environment where people are not afraid to speak up and come up with new ideas.

About employee support
----------------------

Lesser is sure that a good leader not only listens to his subordinates, but also supports their professional development. He says that investing in employee training and mentoring programs always pays off. “Employees bring success back to the firm—create new opportunities and find their own special ways of working with clients, establishing relationships and serving customers that the company might not have served without them,” says Lesser.

According to him, when a leader "invests" in the development of employees, he gets good professionals as a result. Therefore, it is important to take the time to delve into the work of subordinates and give them honest feedback. So the employee will learn more and perform the task better.

{{<ads>}}

In order to promote the professional growth of subordinates, the leader must really get to know and understand them. “When you get to know them better, you can give them the kind of feedback that they can really learn and grow. And you will understand how best to encourage and motivate them,” says Lesser.

When teams work together, he says, they are better at uncovering new ideas, creating and implementing solutions, and empowering customers.

About the Five Year Test
------------------------

Lesser believes that a successful career largely depends on how a person chooses a job. He suggests starting by finding a position that you really like. “The thing is, when people get inspired by what they do, they glow,” Lesser says. In this case, employees are ready to take on more responsibility, they act creatively and become active members of the team, instead of trying to act alone.

To understand whether the position and the company meets your request, the so-called five-year test will help. To do this, Lesser suggests asking yourself the question: Will I still be happy in this job five years from now? “Of course, you don't literally agree to work in the same position for five years, because there can always be another opportunity, even within the same company. But if you choose a place where you think you can be genuinely happy for such a long time, you will not only invest in the present, but also gain the skills, mindset and relationships to prepare for the future,” says Lesser.

Lesser believes that it is important to find a company that will allow you to develop professionally. He lists several distinguishing criteria for a position that allows for growth.

*   First, he says that it is important that the work allows not only to deepen one's expertise, but also to master new skills. If an employee can only do one or two things well, this is very convenient for the employer, but it is better for the employee to be able to go beyond their core skill set and look at the world from different points of view. “Depth of knowledge matters, especially in areas where you have a lot of passion and interest, but don't miss the opportunity to become well-rounded and agile while the risks are relatively low,” he says.
*   Secondly, Lesser advises looking for a company where mentoring is developed, and not just management, because this way the employee will be able to learn new things, develop and get support if something goes wrong.
*   Thirdly, the former CEO of BCG proposes to focus not only on knowledge, but also on practical skills. What a person can do with knowledge will make him different. “Can you draw information from different sources? Can you lead a high performing team? Do you have the skills to make a difference in a complex world, do you have the empathy to see the world through the eyes of other people, including clients, employees and society?” These are the questions he advises you to ask yourself.

{{<ads>}}

On Finding Balance
------------------

According to Lesser, in order to work effectively, you need to find a balance and determine what matters most at the moment. “Prioritizing outside of work, maintaining your health and relationships, and genuinely enjoying the people you work with are not privileges, but rather a vital necessity that contributes to both your well-being and your career.” confident businessman.

He warns that priorities will change over time. There will be times when career immersion and long hours will feel right, while traveling the world or challenging assignments will energize you. But over time, it may turn out that predictability, flexible working hours or the ability to take days off are more important. “The main thing is to be honest with yourself about what is needed at the moment. Even if the scales tilt towards work, make sure you find a place where life outside of work matters so that you have the support you need when your priorities change,” advises Lesser.

In addition, the entrepreneur advises to think carefully before accepting an offer. Often, applicants by this point are already exhausted by writing a resume, finding the right contacts and interviews. But it is the decision itself that requires strength. Lesser advises starting by listening to the recruiter's offer, reading anonymous comments about the employer on profile sites, or asking friends for advice. Next, it is worth getting different opinions from current and past employees of the company. “Ask difficult questions and look for answers to them in real examples, and not just in the concept of the company's development. Then give yourself time to think. Remember that our decisions are largely influenced by those with whom we talk last, ”recommends Lesser.

{{<info>}}
Richard Lesser is the CEO of Boston Consulting Group (BCG) from 2013 to 2021.

Lesser was born in 1962 in Pittsburgh. He graduated summa cum laude from the University of Michigan and received an MBA with honors from Harvard Business School. Lesser joined BCG as a consultant in 1988, having previously worked at Procter & Gamble. At BCG, Lesser focused on strategy work and large-scale transformation. In 2013, he became CEO of the company and held this position until 2021. During his tenure, the firm's workforce more than doubled to 22,000 and revenue almost tripled to $8.6 billion in 2020.

In 2021, the American recruiting service Glassdoor named Lesser the best CEO in the world. BCG is one of the world's best employers and America's largest private companies in 2021, according to Forbes magazine.
{{</info>}}

{{<ads>}}

A few more Lesser tips for novice leaders
-----------------------------------------

*   **If you think that you have finished your education, you are deeply mistaken.** To succeed in the modern world and in the coming decades, you need to constantly learn and absorb information quickly. And it is important not just to accumulate knowledge, but to apply it in practice. “Everyone has to learn faster than ever before, but the people who need to learn the most are the people at the top,” says Lesser. \- And the risk for them is the highest, because a natural “bubble” is emerging around CEOs.

*   **Bet on team leadership.** Work in a team. This does not mean that you do not lead, but lead the team as if you are waiting to be challenged.
*   **Consider the growing importance of technology.** People who come to work for your company do not have to be software engineers. But if they want to conduct qualitative analysis, then they better have data skills.

_Sources: Wall Street Journal, BBC, Financial Times, Forbes, New York Times, Lesser's LinkedIn posts_

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*