---
title: "$2 thousand for dismissal: how Zappos built the most unusual strategy"
description: The online shoe store Zappos, which initially failed to attract investors, eventually attracted the attention of such a giant as Amazon. The main element of the company’s strategy has become customer-oriented, elevated to a cult
date: 2022-06-12T23:54:22+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T23:54:22+08:00
images:
- EfkvwaQ.jpg
caption: 'Photo: John Locher / AP'
authors:
- Arina Doynikova
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
---

One night, a woman called the Zappos hotline. She complained that she couldn't order pizza anywhere and asked Zappos for help. The call center operator not only did not hang up, but also found the phone number of a 24-hour pizzeria for the girl. Zappos chose an unusual business model for an online retailer and built a brand around a customer-centric strategy and corporate culture. Although recruiting cost her $100 million (the company offers compensation for dismissal in the first month of training), in the end, the corporate culture and customer service standards glorified Zappos more than any PR.

Starting as a small online retailer, the company grew to $1 billion in sales over a decade before striking a deal with Amazon, which agreed to develop Zappos as a brand in its own right.

Penthouse office
----------------

One of the founders of Zappos, Tony Shay (died in 2020), admitted that he had been an entrepreneur all his life: as a child he tried to breed worms, sold pins at school, and ran a school cafe at the university. Immediately after graduation, together with his friend Alfred Lin, he launched the first online advertising network LinkExchange, which he sold to Microsoft two years later for $265 million. So at 24, Tony Shay became a millionaire. He always liked investing in ideas, so after the sale of the company, he and Lin decided to create a venture capital fund. Basically, Venture Frogs invested in Internet startups. One of them was the online retailer Zappos.

{{<ads>}}

The history of the company began with a message on the answering machine - in it the young entrepreneur Nick Schwinmurn outlined the idea of ​​​​an online store that would provide a huge selection of shoes for all occasions. Tony thought she was crazy, but Nick called again and was able to convince him: the size of the US shoe market at that time was $ 40 billion, 5% came from mail order sales through catalogs - and this segment of the industry was growing the fastest. As a result, Lin and Shay invested $2 million in the company, and in 1999 the online shoe store was launched under the ShoeSite.ru brand. The name Zappos came up later, slightly changing the Spanish word zapatos - "shoes".

However, attracting funding proved difficult. The idea of ​​buying shoes without trying them on looked dubious and repelled potential investors. Negotiations with the Sequoia fund dragged on, and the money was inexorably running out. For a while, the company's office was in Tony Shay's huge penthouse, where he used to host parties. Venture Frogs then opened a business incubator to give offices to Zappos employees. In 2000, Tony Shay became CEO. When the venture capital ran out, he sold the penthouse and reinvested in Zappos, whose sales remained modest at $1.6 million in 2000.

Solution for clients
--------------------

It was not possible to agree with Sequoia. Zappos stopped trying to attract investors, took out a development loan and began to develop an extended supply chain (buy products and store them in rented warehouses). As a result, the number of brands available to customers has increased. Sales gradually grew, and it became necessary to deal with logistics. At first, it was outsourced, but the companies could not cope with huge batches of shoes of different brands: deliveries were constantly delayed. Shay later wrote in his book, "To entrust this \[logistics\] to a third party and assume that they will take care of our customers as much as we do was one of our biggest mistakes."

In addition, some of the shoes did not reach the buyers for another reason: Zappos delivered some of the goods directly from the manufacturer's warehouse, and there were too many links in this chain that were difficult to control. About 20% of all orders were lost in transit, and although the company compensated for their cost, customer dissatisfaction grew. Despite the fact that “direct deliveries” were more profitable (there was no need to spend money on intermediate storage of products), Zappos’ strategy was based on consumer trust, so the company decided to transfer products to its own warehouses and refuse direct deliveries, although at that moment they accounted for 25% of sales ($8 million). However, this decision paid off - over the next year, turnover more than doubled.

In 2004, Zappos moved to Las Vegas. The Sequoia fund finally agreed to the first and then the second round of investments - in total, he invested $38 million in the company.

{{<ads>}}

The first offline store opened in Kentucky. Sales rose to $184 million. By 2008, Zappos entered the Canadian market and launched the first large-scale "Give some Zappos to your day" campaign (before that, they attracted customers only through targeted advertising) and expanded the range to include clothing and accessories. and its sales reached $1 billion.

In 2009, Amazon bought Zappos for $1.2 billion. At the same time, Fortune magazine named it one of the 100 best companies to work for. Amazon continued to develop Zappos as a separate division and retained its previous management, with Tony Shay remaining as CEO through 2020.

Can you just talk
-----------------

Initially, Zappos tried to attract the consumer with a large selection of products, but over time, the company's focus shifted to customer service, and the call center became its “heart”, which received a separate name “Customer Loyalty Team”. Now he works around the clock, but in order for this to become possible, the company had to move from San Francisco to Las Vegas: as Tony Shay admitted, they could not find enough employees in the same place who were ready to work the night shift.

In addition, on all pages of the site, the company's phone number was always placed in the most prominent place. Shay believed that this was the best way to promote a brand: you have a few minutes of a person’s attention, and if you use this time correctly, he will remember this conversation for a long time and tell all his friends and acquaintances about the company. This approach is called "plus one": the company seeks to provide the client with a little more than he expects to receive: whether it be bonuses, additional services, advice or gifts. For example, during the pandemic, Zappos invited customers to call the hotline for any reason, even just to talk. At the same time, the company began to sell shoes by the piece - specifically for people with disabilities, so that they do not have to pay extra for a pair of shoes if they wear only one of them.

{{<ads>}}

Another important element of Zappos' strategy is the 365-day return policy. Combined with free shipping (including the return of unsuitable products), this reduces the risks for the consumer and motivates him to order more often. And while this approach has resulted in very high returns (about 35% of the value of an online order), it has led to increased loyalty, with 50% of Zappos customers returning after their first order.

However, it was not always possible to please customers. In 2012, the company suffered a cyberattack. According to Zappos, hackers gained access to 24 million accounts. Despite assurances that the attackers failed to collect credit card information and other personal data, Zappos customers filed a class action lawsuit. The process lasted seven years, and in October 2019, the court found Zappos guilty: she paid the plaintiffs $ 1.6 million and gave all customers a 10 percent discount. The public did not approve of this: journalists said that this situation is "a huge step back in resolving data privacy violations and a discouraging reminder that it is still easy for large companies to get out of leak incidents with minimal consequences."

Zappos applied its "customer-centric strategy" to suppliers as well. Each brand that the company works with has access to all information about the store: stock levels, volumes and their profitability. Suppliers can make orders themselves and participate in the formation of the assortment. This transparency has allowed Zappos to retain suppliers even during crises in the beginning of the journey: for example, once a truck with goods overturned, and shoes were scattered along the side of the road. Then the company lost 20% of all stocks, but managed to maintain the confidence of suppliers.

Money for layoffs
-----------------

Zappos believes that the culture of the company and its brand are two sides of the same coin. The brand is just a (slightly lagging) indicator of the state of the culture. This means that the reputation of the brand depends on each employee, so it is necessary that all of them share a customer-oriented corporate culture. The hiring process includes two stages: the first interview consists of standard professional questions, and the second is completely devoted to the values ​​and views of the person.

Another striking feature of Zappos is termination compensation. The training of new employees lasts four months, and in the first weeks they are offered $2,000 to leave the company (in addition to the money they have already earned). In addition, every employee, regardless of the position to which he came, begins his journey at Zappos with a job in the call center: it is believed that this is how employees adopt the approach to the buyer. Careful selection and training pay off: about 75% of the company's income comes from regular customers.

{{<ads>}}

"Holacratic Cleansing"
----------------------

Tony Shay managed to create a unique corporate culture at Zappos, but he also introduced very questionable ideas that negatively affected the company's image. This was, for example, his “holacratic ultimatum”. In 2015, Shay decided to radically change the company's management structure by introducing holacracy, a management system that replaces a vertical hierarchy with a horizontal one. In his letter, he set a condition for employees: either accept the innovations or quit with compensation. At that time, Zappos was engaged in one of the key stages of the final merger with Amazon - the integration of cloud databases (Super Cloud). The staff involved in the project were given more time to think, but 38% of the Super Cloud team left Zappos almost immediately.

In total, due to this reorganization, the company lost 18% of its employees. Many did not appreciate the radicalness of Tony Shay. The media criticized Zappos: holacracy as a concept is aimed at developing internal structure and does not have high-quality feedback mechanisms - for a company that built its brand on customer service, such changes looked strange. Therefore, already two years later, Amazon began to return Zappos to the previous hierarchical structure. Management said the company is "faced with big challenges in its business performance" and is looking to shift the focus of employees back to the customer.

**Author:** *Arina Doynikova*