---
title: "Three useful exercises to help overcome shyness"
description: It's normal to get nervous before a public speaking or important meeting, but sometimes the anxiety becomes so strong that it interferes with life. Clinical psychologist Ilya Rozov explains where it comes from and recommends three exercises to help deal with it.
date: 2022-06-08T01:52:03+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T01:52:03+08:00
images:
- h0lSWyS.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Ilya Rozov
interest: health
channel: 
- mindfulness
- instructions
tags: 
---

Many people experience excitement in front of an audience. The American clinical psychologist and one of the creators of Acceptance and Responsibility Therapy (ACT) Stephen Hayes once conducted a study: he asked public people after their performance whether they were worried before going on stage? It turned out that more than 70% of the respondents were really nervous, but continued to perform. This may lead us to think that getting excited about social situations is quite common and common despite everything your mind tells you to be.

Imagine a person who was at a party for the first time and experienced shyness. He felt his palms sweating, fear growing in his chest with a strong heartbeat, and his thoughts filled with frightening phrases and images. This person left the party, and the shyness gradually receded. Now he tries not to go to such events, so as not to experience excitement once again. Only there are no gatherings with friends, no communication in his life.

Of course, in most people, shyness does not cause such consequences. But our interaction with unpleasant feelings leads to traps, like the one the person in the example above fell into. There are two main reasons why this happens.

{{<ads>}}

A small digression into history, or a metaphor for the cave mind
----------------------------------------------------------------

I ask you to treat this part more as a small metaphor than real scientific data.

Imagine two cavemen. They live in a primitive society. It was very radical and tough. Went wrong, talked to the elder wrong, let you down on the hunt... and you are excluded. At that moment, loneliness was equal to death.

And these two cavemen are very different from each other. One constantly worries and thinks about what to say and how to behave in society. The other behaves freely, not thinking about the consequences.

Which one will survive?

That's right, the first one. And since anxious minds survived, they passed on such genes and behavior from generation to generation.

On the power of language
------------------------

When you read an article about shyness, you probably don’t think very much about the role language plays in its occurrence. Actually quite big. To understand this, I suggest you do two exercises.

1\. If you know the word "Hello", then nod or mentally say "Yes".

2\. Imagine that you are holding a piece of ice in your hands. It is quite cold, but gradually melts under the heat of your body. A drop of cool melt water rolls down your arm. You lift a piece of ice higher and see how transparent it is, how light breaks through it. And you bring a piece of ice to your mouth, feeling a coolness near your lips. And then put it in your mouth and start nibbling, hearing a characteristic crunch.

After reading the first sentence, you began to do what is written. Even if you thought: “I won’t nod or say yes,” you still began to remember what “Hello” means, etc. You have entered into this strange game - the written text led you to a certain behavior, although you did not receive anything in return. While doing the second task, you may have felt cool, winced, felt pain in your teeth - but in fact there was no ice.

{{<ads>}}

It all happens through language. He penetrated very deeply into our lives, into us and connects things that, it would seem, should not have been connected. But what about social anxiety?

The fact is that language helps people to have experiences that have never been. If a child is taught that red is the color of danger, what will he do when he sees a red traffic light? That's right, he will look for danger. If I tell you to get up and go outside now, you might think, "It's cold outside, there will be a lot of people, I won't feel comfortable," even though you're still at home. This experience is not yet, but you already know about it.

This powerful force of language leads you to experience excitement not only in social situations themselves, but also far beyond them. You worry before and after meetings, how many people will be at the event, how nervous you will be, although you are still at home or just going to bed before tomorrow's performance.

How to help yourself?
---------------------

If language and evolution lead you into the trap of social anxiety, then experience is the way out. It's one thing to imagine how you crunch ice, and quite another to actually eat it. It's the same with social situations: your mind and tongue tell you it's going to be terrible, but what kind of experience are you actually having? The following exercises will help you understand this.

**1\. Explore the experience of shyness.** To do this, I suggest you do the Naming exercise. For some time, you need to try to describe the entire experience associated with your shyness in a few words: thoughts, feelings, sensations and emotions. There was a feeling in the body, you put a label “feeling” on it, an emotion appeared - “emotion”. Try to move away from content to form and experience the experience as it is. When you learn to notice more intense feelings and thoughts, realizing that it is just a feeling or thought, it will become easier for you to control your behavior.

{{<ads>}}

Why is it important to pay attention to the form? Consider the situation. Think: “Everyone will laugh at me.” And now: "I have an idea that everyone will laugh at me." Feel the difference? The label helps us move away from content that sounds like fact to directly living the experience - the thought as it is.

**2\. Determine why it is important for you to work with shyness.** Do you want to make friends or strike up a love relationship, pump up your public speaking skills, or just spend time in the company? By identifying the key reasons, you can understand why you should face your shyness.

**3\. Make a list of bold actions.** We are all afraid of different things. Write down the top 10 most unpleasant for you. Now start making them. By taking ten bold actions, you will gradually learn to handle your shyness and not stop because of it. For example, you find it difficult to call your friends because you think, "I'm taking up their time." But this situation is easier to survive than a real meeting with friends. Therefore, a call can be the first bold step towards your values.

You can choose one exercise or try all. But remember: in case of severe social shyness or anxiety, it is worth seeking help from a specialist.

**Author:** *Ilya Rozov, clinical psychologist*