---
title: "There is always soda in my glass: Richard Branson on giving up alcohol"
description: Richard Branson was 70 years old when he went into space. To maintain health at an elderly age, a businessman is primarily helped by sports - every morning begins with a workout. And also a special diet - he drinks 20 cups of green tea a day.
date: 2022-06-13T11:26:11+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T11:26:11+08:00
images:
- 7SnEvFz.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Federico Rios / Bloomberg'
authors:
- Elena Sorokina
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- business guru
tags: 
---

Billionaire Richard Branson says that feeling good is first and foremost a daily routine that hasn't changed much in 50 years. As in the story of the gardener who discovered the secret of the perfect English lawn: “Water every day, mow every week. For 300 years."

Typical day of a billionaire
----------------------------

Branson gets up, as a rule, at five in the morning and devotes the first 40 minutes to fitness. “As I get older, I’ve taken better care of my health and I’m finding new ways to support it, like doing dumbbells or doing circuits,” he writes [on his blog](https://www.virgin.com/branson-family/richard-branson-blog). For most of the year, Branson lives on his personal Necker Island in the Caribbean. And when he is at home, he adds kitesurfing or tennis to his morning fitness.

After a light breakfast at 9-10 in the morning, the businessman gets to work: reports, news, correspondence with Virgin Group offices and calls around the world - and so on until 17-18 hours.

Branson prefers to combine lunch with a business meeting, and devotes the evening to himself and his family. Dinner is the highlight of the day. And not only because he loves delicious food. A feast in a narrow circle or with friends, whom the Bransons often invite to visit, is always a source of fun, jokes and new business ideas.

From 20 o'clock it's time for personal correspondence, blog, social networks and books. Branson is dyslexic and not easy to read, but he consistently reads a book a month, preferring biographies (Martin Flanagan's The Art of Pollination) and business literature (Reed Hoffman's Masters of Scale). And then he discusses what he read in his book club on the Literati platform. Membership costs $22 per month. Monetizing a hobby is very entrepreneurial.

{{<ads>}}

Health like an astronaut
------------------------

The entrepreneur is sure that anyone will achieve heights in the business for which he has a passion. He opened his first business at the age of 16 - published a youth magazine, and then sold records. However, it seems that the sky attracted him most of all. At 34, Branson created the Virgin Atlantic airline. At 44, he opened Virgin Balloon Flights, which organizes balloon flights. And at 54, the entrepreneur founded Virgin Galactic, which is engaged in commercial flights into space.

Unlike Elon Musk's SpaceX and Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin, Branson's company makes manned spacecraft. Therefore, every flight is a risk to life. When the Virgin Galactic ship crashed in the Mojave Desert in 2014 and the pilot died, the billionaire vowed that he would only let tourists on board after his family flies into space.

Branson started with himself. Last summer, a week before his 71st birthday, he traveled to suborbital space, spent several minutes in zero gravity and landed safely. At that time, the health of the grandfather of four grandchildren was not inferior to the physical condition of the professional astronauts who accompanied him aboard the Virgin Galactic SpaceShip.

What motivates you not to quit sports
-------------------------------------

For a man in his 70s, Branson looks full of energy. It's not just about genetics. First of all, sport helps to maintain the status of “healthy and alert”. Over the past 50 years, Branson has hardly missed a morning workout. Some of his favorite ways to start the day include kitesurfing, tennis and fitness with personal trainer Cathy Doo. “If you find an hour for your body in the morning, then that day you will have 5-6 hours of increased creativity,” he said  [in an interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NYp_J3_xmG4) at the opening of the Virgin Active fitness club in Cape Town, without stopping pedaling the exercise bike.

Conducting interviews or business meetings on the move, or best of all on a walk, is the norm for a Virgin boss. Encourage yourself to go outside more often and you will be happy, he is sure. If there are few reasons for outdoor activities, the entrepreneur advises to take up a suitable hobby, for example, walking the dog.

Sports are addictive, and the most compelling reason not to quit is for fun. Branson will never give up his morning dose of endorphins.

{{<ads>}}

Run for a million pounds
------------------------

However, physical activity not only stimulates the production of hormones of happiness. Sir Richard's children are seriously passionate about charity. Since 2014, they have run Virgin Strive, a multi-day sports challenge that includes cycling, hiking, catamaran or kayaking. For participation [, you need to pay](https://www.big-change.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/STRIVE-Weekender-2021-FAQs-1.pdf) a fee from £280 to £1,000. Each such event replenishes the budget of the Branson Jr. Big Change charity fund by at least £1 million.

Branson Sr. almost every year gets involved in this adventure. On last year's Virgin Strive, he cycled several hundred miles, and when the mandatory cycle program ended, like a true Mr. Yes, he agreed to ride the extra miles. But it was as if fate itself had said stop: suddenly the bike's brakes failed, Branson fell and was injured. Recovery dragged on until March, even missing the tenth Necker Cup tennis event, another Branson charity event. However, the motivation for sports has not gone away. In April, the entrepreneur again took up the racket and strength training.

Not at all vegan
----------------

“I watch what I eat,” Branson says. The billionaire's diet was developed by his friend Dr. William Lee, an oncologist at Harvard. Required components: about 20 cups of green tea a day, a couple of cups of coffee and kiwi as a powerful antioxidant. In addition to these three foods, the diet includes oatmeal, sourdough bread, hard cheese, leafy greens, legumes, olive oil, sardines, walnuts, berries, and dark chocolate.

There is no place left for alcohol - Branson does not drink at all. To avoid unnecessary questions, he uses the soda trick: "You can hold a glass of champagne in your hands, but no one knows what is poured into it."

{{<ads>}}

What Branson has no plans to give up is meat. “People won’t stop eating meat, there’s nothing you can do about it,” he remarks philosophically. But in order to minimize the harm from the production of beef and chicken fillet, he invests in the Upside company: here they can grow a 100-gram steak from several protein molecules. “The taste is indistinguishable from the real thing,” Branson says after tasting a chicken breast that has never been hatched.

Employee well-being is company profit
-------------------------------------

When Branson was asked about the three components of mental and physical health, in his Instagram account (in Russia, the social network is recognized as extremist and banned), he answered this way:

*   do everything for a quality night's sleep;
*   surround yourself with people you can rely on, share your joys with them and support each other in difficult times;
*   break into a cake, but find an hour or two a day for fitness, that is, take minimal care of yourself.

The businessman wants to infect as many people as possible with his passion for a healthy lifestyle, so he invests in fitness and healthy lifestyle apps for his smartphone. The Virgin Active brand operates 238 fitness clubs in eight countries. The experience of the 14 million people who visit them gave the entrepreneur the idea to create the Virgin Pulse app. Its goal is to help users monitor their well-being, mood and instill good habits. The product was developed for both personal and corporate use. However, Branson is betting on business clients: he sees a direct link between the well-being of employees and the profitability of companies.

In general, the idea of ​​caring for the team is one of the key ones for him. “A good leader is like a good parent,” Branson says on the Tim Ferriss [podcast .](https://podcasts.apple.com/ru/podcast/272-sir-richard-branson-the-billionaire-maverick/id863897795?i=1000393241572) You love children and give them the best. It’s the same in a team: you need to love people, listen to them, motivate them, give them the freedom to make mistakes and the freedom to do what they do best. After all, business is about people.”

**Author:** *Elena Sorokina*