---
title: "Ex-head of IBM: it is better to rush and make a mistake than to be late and make a mistake"
description: In the early 1990s, Louis Gerstner saved IBM from collapse with drastic reforms. What is “constructive impatience” and “bear hug” and how a leader can achieve a culture of high performance - in a selection of his statements
date: 2022-06-13T15:32:18+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T15:32:18+08:00
images:
- 5zvAMTm.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Stuart Ramson / AP'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

Integration instead of separation
---------------------------------

In 1993, Louis Gerstner headed IBM: one of the largest IT corporations at that time was in a deplorable state. At first, after analyzing the company's financial performance, he concluded that its chances of survival were slim. In 1990 and 1991, the company's losses were $1 billion each; in 1992, this figure reached $ 5 billion. Then IBM produced computers, the demand for which was falling due to the emergence of more advanced computers. Nevertheless, Gerstner decided to try to save the firm.

The previous management of the computer company planned to split it into several independent firms so that each of them could compete in its own market segment. But Gerstner's first decision in office was to abandon the division of IBM. The company's board of directors made it clear that they expected the new leader to genuinely solve IBM's problems. They wanted to see a company that would use end-to-end technologies and integrated customer offerings. Therefore, Gerstner advocated keeping the company as a whole. As he himself later said: “This was the most important decision I have ever made, not only at IBM, but in my entire career.” At the same time, he did not know exactly how he would use the potential of this single company, but he believed that if IBM managed to become a leading IT corporation,

The second important step was the restructuring of IBM's economic base. The fact is that the company was very close to being left without funds. Gerstner has always believed that running a business is pretty simple: if revenue, gross profit, and expenses are properly aligned, the result will be higher profits and positive cash flow.

{{<ads>}}

“Unfortunately, in the case of IBM, this ratio was completely wrong. Revenues were shrinking because the company depended on hardware, and its sales were declining. Gross margins were plummeting due to declining mainframe prices. The only thing that could stabilize the company was to cut costs faster than the decline in gross margins,” Gerstner said. He decided to do everything to make 1994 profitable. To do this, the new CEO launched a massive $8.9 billion cost-cutting program. He also began reorganizing the company's core business processes. As part of this move, IBM simultaneously carried out more than 60 large initiatives and several hundred smaller ones at the level of independent divisions and departments. The measures taken have affected such areas of business, such as hardware and software development, order acquisition and fulfillment, supply chain, customer relationship management and service. As a result, after three years of losses, the company received $ 3 billion in net profit in 1994.

New management philosophy
-------------------------

At the first meeting with members of the board of directors of IBM, Gerstner spoke about his philosophy and management practices. “We started by establishing principles. Why principles? Yes, because, in my opinion, all successful companies are guided by principles, not procedures. Decisions must be made by leaders who understand the key success factors of the company and skillfully and wisely apply the principles to the specific situation in accordance with the current situation, ”said Gerstner.

According to the CEO of IBM, the market tells the business what to do. “IBM must focus on delivering customer service and beating the competition. A company's success comes mainly from its success with its customers, and nothing else, ”this principle has become one of the main principles in the work of IBM. Gerstner has always said that the best companies embrace innovation, take smart risks, and grow by looking for opportunities in existing directions and exploring new areas. Gerstner believed that technology had always been IBM's forte. “We just need to use the existing knowledge to create products that are focused primarily on customer needs. All other areas of the company's activities will benefit from this, including the production of hardware and software, the provision of services, ”he explained.

{{<ads>}}

The new CEO began to look for people who work to solve problems and help colleagues. He fired "politicians" who were too addicted to corporate intrigues and their own promotion. “I wanted employees to focus on the customer and the market, not internal status. Therefore, I abolished the positions of IBM vice presidents, ordinary vice presidents and directors and banned all press releases relating to organizational matters, ”Gerstner recalled. In his opinion, the best way to put an end to bureaucracy and internecine warfare in the team is to make it clear to everyone that the company encourages and rewards teamwork.

Gerstner said that he would deal with the strategy, and the task of top management is its implementation. He trusted his employees and demanded the same from them. “Just keep me up to date with informal communication. Don't hide bad news - I hate surprises. Don't try to blame everything on me. Solve problems yourself; don’t take them up all the time,” the CEO said.

The head of IBM believed that it was necessary to act quickly and not be afraid of mistakes. If errors occur, let them be the result of speed, not slowness. “I like to call it ‘constructive impatience. We are strong in research, teaching, committees and debate. But in our industry and in our times, it's often better to be quick than thoughtful. I'm not saying that planning and analysis is bad, just that they should not harm the speed of implementation, ”said Gerstner.

{{<ads>}}

Gerstner noted that hierarchy was of little importance to him because it interfered with the effective collaboration of different departments. “Let's invite people to meetings who can help solve the problem, regardless of position. Keep the number of committees and meetings to a minimum. No decision committees. Let's talk honestly and directly," he suggested.

Louis Gerstner was the former CEO and Chairman of the Board of Directors of IBM Corporation from 1993 to 2002.

Gerstner was born in 1942 in New York State. He graduated from Dartmouth College in 1963 with a bachelor's degree in engineering. Immediately after graduating from college, he entered Harvard Business School, graduating in 1965.

After graduating, he worked at the consulting firm McKinsey & Company, then held senior positions at financial services company American Express and packaged goods company RJR Nabisco. In 1993 he headed IBM. During his reign, the capitalization of IBM grew from $29 billion to $168 billion. After leaving IBM, he worked in The Carlyle Group investment fund, and in 2013 he was appointed chairman of the board of directors of the Broad Institute, a research center working in the field of biomedicine and genetics.

Culture change
--------------

It was important for Gerstner to create a "performance culture" at IBM. “If you get into a team with a successful culture, you immediately feel it. The leaders of such a company are real initiative leaders. Employees are committed to the success of the company, products are of high quality. Quality is everyone's concern. Losing to a competitor, in a fight big or small, infuriates people. There is no place for mediocrity. Excellence is cultivated, encouraged and rewarded,” wrote Gerstner.

{{<ads>}}

At the same time, the culture of high results can be introduced, according to Gerstner, only by such leaders who set serious tasks, evaluate their implementation and force people to report on the work done. “They are reformers, constantly leading their companies to change faster than their competitors,” Gerstner described the best leaders. Good CEOs roll up their sleeves and solve problems personally. They don't hide behind employees. They not only control the work of others. Every day they meet with customers, suppliers and business partners.

To transform corporate culture, Gerstner created a plan called "Bear Grip." Each of the 50 top managers of the company had to meet at least five of the largest clients within three months. The goal is to listen to them, demonstrate that they are important to the company, and take the necessary measures to retain them. The same was prescribed to the direct subordinates of these leaders (more than 200 people). At the end of the meeting, everyone had to write a one or two page report to Gerstner. The bear hug was the first step in changing the IBM culture. It was important for me to emphasize that from now on we are building the company "outside" and it is the customers who set the direction of our actions. What a fuss it was when people realized that I actually read all the reports! But after that, their actions became much more energetic, ”the CEO recalled.

_Sources: Forbes, New York Times, Washington Post, Louis Gerstner Who said elephants can't dance? Tough Reforms for Company Survival”, IBM website._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*