---
title: "Genes, lifestyle, ecology: how they affect our well-being"
description: "To live long and not get sick is the dream of any person. But is it possible to somehow influence the quality of life, or is everything determined by genetics and the environment?"
date: 2022-05-26T01:26:31+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-26T01:26:31+08:00
images:
- nI8Xna0.jpg
caption: 'Photo: William Choquette/Pexels'
authors:
- mygenetics
- Valery Polunovsky
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
tags: 
---

All information about how our body should function is stored in DNA - macromolecules of deoxyribonucleic acid. "Molecules of life" contain hereditary information and at the same time represent a detailed instruction for managing all processes in the body. Certain parts of DNA are called genes.

These are functional sites that regulate the functioning of the body by synthesizing certain proteins and other regulatory molecules. In short, genes are like conductors: they are responsible for the formation of cells - what shape they will take and what function they will perform. And they also affect the transmission of signals within the body.

That is, our life activity is regulated not by genes as such, but by proteins that are synthesized on their basis.

What exactly do genes influence?
--------------------------------

To put it bluntly - everything!

Genes depend on:

*   what diet will be really useful for a particular person;
*   our mood and behavior;
*   the sport that suits us;
*   how the body copes with toxins, internal and external;
*   the risk of diseases, including cancer, cardiovascular, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases;
*   and much more.

{{<ads>}}

How much the quality of our life depends on genes
-------------------------------------------------

Genes determine 49% of how an organism will function. Another 40% is the “merit” of the way of life, society, culture, and upbringing. And only 11% of our health depends on medicine. But no matter how good a person’s genotype is, if he eats fast food, neglects exercise, regularly goes to bed after midnight and forgets to rest, his health will quickly deteriorate. Thus, the quality and duration of life are equally dependent on both genetics and our habits.

### Genes and healthy lifestyle

The basic recommendations - drink clean water, move more, eat vegetables, not smoke and reduce alcohol consumption as much as possible - were not born from scratch. And yet these are general tips for everyone at once. And since everyone has their own genetics, the recommendations for different people will be slightly different.

Let's take a familiar example - coffee. It contains a large amount of flavonoids, antioxidants and minerals. These substances have a beneficial effect on the prevention of Alzheimer's disease and a number of cancers. That is, in terms of life expectancy, coffee protects the body. But, on the other hand, caffeine increases activity and heart rate, which in general is not very favorable for the cardiovascular system.

The detoxification system helps to absorb caffeine and protect the body from its toxic effects. First of all, the CYP1A2 gene - it is he who encodes the element that destroys caffeine. The amount of this protein depends on genetics. In some, it is induced in large quantities and neutralizes caffeine within 40 minutes. Such a lucky person can drink up to five cups of coffee a day without any special consequences for the heart. In another person, the duration of metabolism can reach up to six hours. Then it is more useful to limit yourself to one serving of coffee in the morning to [reduce the risk of a heart attack or stroke](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2474926/&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1651219651233289&usg=AOvVaw201xDUMDKL7zbM-benkzqS) .

How many cups of coffee a day should you drink? To answer accurately, you need to determine your genotype.

### Genes and ecology

With habits and lifestyle - it's understandable. But what about factors that we cannot change? For example, the environment is constantly deteriorating, negatively affecting the quality of life and the risks of certain diseases. But there is another, stronger factor - civilizational.

Thanks to medical and biological research over the last century, we have developed vaccines, drugs, therapies, and preventive measures that have helped improve population health and increase life expectancy relative to our ancestors. That is, today we have ways to reduce the impact of ecology on the body.

{{<ads>}}

### Genes and detoxification

An important role in human adaptation to environmental situations is played by the mechanisms of detoxification systems. They are constantly being improved and help us get rid of natural poisons, toxins and heavy metals. However, every decade there are more and more negative factors, and the body does not have time to adapt. Therefore, our detoxification system does not always cope with cleansing, which leads to a deterioration in well-being and the risk of diseases, including cardiovascular, oncological, etc.

A classic example is aspirin. In most people, it is metabolized normally and does not adversely affect the body. However, in some people the drug is absorbed incorrectly, and the detoxification system cannot cope with the removal of intermediate forms of the drug. This [can lead](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0084244) to an increase in blood clotting disorders, internal bleeding and other toxic effects on the body. Whether you take aspirin or pay attention to other drugs - a genetic study will help to find out.

Another example: a person lives in a place where there are industries that use coal. With incomplete combustion of combustion products, benzapyrene is formed - a substance with a strong pro-oncogenic effect. How well the body copes with its effects [can be determined](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24761888/) by the activity of the aryl-hydrocarboxylic receptor: the stronger it is, the higher the risk of cancer, which means that it is more useful for people to live away from coal production and major roads.

Following recommendations based on individual characteristics helps to strengthen the body's natural defenses. For example, drink coffee or replace it with a drink with a similar taste. Continue to live in a big city or choose a place without industrial production and with a minimum number of cars. Ultimately, this will help improve the quality of life and increase its duration.

### Genes and aging

So, having received an “instruction” for managing your body, you can not only improve your health, but also “push back” old age? Everything is somewhat more complicated.

A person has many systems associated with the aging process. The first is to limit the number of cell divisions. This limit is laid down by nature, and so far people have not figured out how to increase it. In addition, mutations and polymorphisms in certain genes can lead to the development of age-related diseases and accelerate the aging process.

Life expectancy is most strongly influenced by genes associated with the functioning of the cardiovascular system, primarily the ApoE gene. Certain variants of this gene significantly increase the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease or myocardial infarction. And then [specific prevention](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6163513/) is needed , including an increased consumption of omega-3-unsaturated acids and the rejection of sports that can injure the brain - boxing and taekwondo.

Or another option. With mutations or polymorphisms of genes associated with protecting the body from free radicals, it is necessary to increase the intake of foods with a large amount of antioxidants, such as berries, broccoli, and beets. In addition, it is recommended to reduce exposure to any radiation, including from gadgets, and to fly less often on airplanes.

{{<ads>}}

Old age is inevitable. But, knowing the characteristics of your genes, you can choose a strategy for the prevention of possible diseases in order to prevent them and live more productively in old age. This is active longevity.

How to increase life expectancy?
--------------------------------

There are many large studies that evaluate recommendations related to longevity. For example, it has been proven that physical activity [can increase](https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1003332) life expectancy by an average of 5-7 years, and smoking can [reduce](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19317324/) it by 15 years. But everything has a limit. Recently, a specific figure has often been heard - 120 years. Biologically, it is.

120 years is the very “ceiling” due to the end of cell division. Telomeres are responsible for this - sections of chromosomes - they determine the age of the cell. Each cell goes through about 50 divisions. Then the telomerase protection ends and the cellular “death” programmed by nature occurs.

That is, a person may well live more than 100 years. However, the question is different - how many diseases will he have by this age? So, salt is not in the duration of life as such, but in a long active life without diseases. And this can be achieved if you eat right, engage in physical activity, etc. And knowing your genetic characteristics will allow you to choose individual recommendations.

**Author:** *Valery Polunovsky, molecular biologist, head of development at MyGenetics.*