---
title: "Advertising as a Depression Cure: How Kellogg's Survived the 1930s Recession"
description: Instead of cutting costs and downsizing, breakfast cereal maker Kellogg’s increased spending during the Great Depression. Here’s how it helped her survive during the worst economic downturn
date: 2022-06-12T14:49:30+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T14:49:30+08:00
images:
- 8vC6UyJ.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
---

One of the biggest shocks to the American economy was the Great Depression, which broke out in the 1930s. US GDP fell at a record pace, unemployment reached 25%. Business immediately switched to survival mode, and one thing was clear to everyone - not everyone will come out of the crisis. From 1929 to 1932, 32,000 private companies went bankrupt in the United States, one in five banks in the country closed, and more than 12 million Americans lost their jobs.

In the hope of staying afloat, many companies have begun to save and cut costs, including marketing. But famed American food maker Kellogg's did things differently. One of the best advertising slogans of the 20th century, "Snap, Crackle and Pop" (eng. "Snap! Crack! Pop!"), the company came up with at the dawn of the Great Depression - in 1929. This and several other measures helped Kellogg's not only survive the "dark times" but also increase revenue by 30% by 1933. The company has become the world's leading breakfast cereal manufacturer and has held that title ever since.

Against the stream
------------------

Kellogg's was founded by William Keith Kellogg in 1906. It was originally called Battle Creek Toasted Corn Flake, and seven years before the Great Depression began, it was renamed the Kellogg Company. The firm specialized in the production of Kellogg's Corn Flakes. Initially, the company worked only in the United States, and already in 1914 it began international expansion and entered the Canadian market.

{{<ads>}}

In the 1920s, the breakfast cereal market was still relatively new: Ready-to-eat cereal had been around for decades, but Americans didn't see it as a viable alternative to porridge. At that time, only two companies dominated this sector - Kellogg's and Post. When the Great Depression hit, no one knew what would happen to consumer demand. Because of the high risks, Post acted predictably: it began to save money and cut advertising costs.

However, Kellogg's chose to act differently. Immediately after the market crash in 1929, the company doubled its advertising budget. In particular, she highlighted the marketing campaign for Kellogg's Rice Krispies, which hit stores a year before the Great Depression. The company first launched the "Snap, Crackle and Pop" slogan in radio ads based on onomatopoeia: when a cereal is thrown into milk, it pops with a crunch). He immediately appeared in print, and then illustrator Vernon Grant came up with cartoon mascots - Snap, Crackle and Pop elves. They appeared on the packaging, quickly became famous and are still popular mascots of Kellogg's rice cereal.

The company did not miss the opportunity to express itself. For example, Kellogg's gave members of Richard Byrd's expedition to the South Pole a two-year supply of Kellogg's cereal. In addition, the breakfast cereal manufacturer sponsored the first regular radio show for children, The Singing Lady. Kellogg's also released Singing Lady Party Packs, which included everything a parent could need to throw a kid's birthday party: invitations, seating cards, favors, masks, cake decorating, and recipes. The set could be obtained in exchange for mailing a cornflake lid and 10 cents.

“Kellogg's crisis strategy in advertising has been successful because the increase in advertising spending has allowed the company's brands to attract more attention from consumers,” said experts from the analytical company CB Insights.

Strength in employees
---------------------

While other companies were cutting staff en masse, Kellogg's was creating new jobs. This provided the company with support during the crisis period. For example, Kellogg's switched from three 8-hour shifts at a cereal factory to four 6-hour shifts. At the same time, hourly wages for employees were increased by 12.5%. Then-U.S. President Herbert Hoover supported Kellogg's initiative to reduce working hours.

{{<ads>}}

This step pleased the employees of the company. People were able to work and support their families during the Great Depression. The mood in the team has improved, and the number of accidents at work has also decreased. As a result, productivity at Kellogg's in two years of a 30-hour work week [reached](https://www.cbinsights.com/research/business-strategies-survive-rebuild-crisis/) the level of 40 hours.

In 1930, Kellogg's took another interesting step. She was the first among others in the food industry to write the composition and nutritional value of the product on the packaging. This increased consumer confidence in it and attracted those who are worried about the composition of the products.

In the same year, the company founded the William Kellogg WK Kellogg Foundation, whose global mission was to help children reach their potential. The foundation also worked to improve public health in the Battle Creek area, building schools and outdoor camps in rural Michigan.

“The company's decision to invest in its employees and the local community has helped to increase employee loyalty and productivity, which has ensured the success of the company,” said [experts](https://www.cbinsights.com/research/business-strategies-survive-rebuild-crisis/) from the analytical company CB Insights.

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*