---
title: "How Booking Holding Survived the Dot-Com Crash, 9/11, and 2008 Crisis"
description: Booking Holdings has been on the brink of collapse twice. The company survived the panic after the September 11 attacks and the global financial crisis. The titan of the online booking market was saved by one successful deal and a series of strategic decisions
date: 2022-06-08T13:35:29+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T13:35:29+08:00
images:
- G5GIbw0.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Noam Galai/Getty Images'
authors:
- Elizaveta Anokhina
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
---

Booking Holdings is one of the largest players in the travel industry: the company, founded in 1998, has a capitalization of [more than](https://companiesmarketcap.com/booking-holdings/marketcap/) $90 billion, it also owns the Booking.com hotel booking service, which has remained the leader in its segment for many years. And now few people remember that the company started with a completely different business model, survived three major crises in the first four years of its existence, and its shares, the value of which fluctuates around $2,000, once cost only a little more than $1.

Infinite Crisis
---------------

Jay Walker has always wanted to do his own thing. At the age of nine, he created a newspaper. While studying at Cornell University, he wrote and published a book called 1,000 Ways to Win at Monopoly — over 100,000 copies were sold, and the Monopoly publishing company sued the young enthusiast (and lost). After graduating in the late 1980s, Walker published his weekly, did advertising, distributed catalogs for retailers, and even sold light sculptures. By the early 1990s, he managed to create about 20 different companies and finally realized that he could earn money simply on his ability to come up with more and more new ideas. So in 1994, the Walker Digital research center was created, which was engaged in the development of patents for business.

Walker soon came up with a concept now known as “name your price”: the buyer says how much he is willing to pay for a product or service, and the seller chooses whether or not to accept the offer. This business model was supposed to help retailers reduce the volume of unsold products and eliminate the need to sell surplus at a discount.

Walker quickly found a segment that was perfect to test the idea, airfare. In the mid-1990s, the number of empty seats on flights around the world reached 500 thousand daily: many people still could not afford to fly. In 1997, Walker created Priceline.com. Buyers could bid for the ticket themselves in exchange for some restrictions: for example, the choice of airline and departure time remained with the platform.

{{<ads>}}

However, most of the air carriers to which Walker proposed partnerships were not enthusiastic about the concept. Major players were creating and promoting their own websites at that time and saw Priceline.com as a competitor. By 1998, the entrepreneur managed to negotiate with only two small firms, TWA and America West, after which he opened sales.

The number of visits to the site on the first day of operation was 600 thousand (a huge number for 1998), during the first two months more than 30 thousand tickets were sold. Not the last role was played by a successful marketing ploy: Priceline.com launched an advertising campaign with actor William Shatner, who plays Captain Kirk in the Star Trek film franchise. “At that time, no one \[of the IT players\] hired celebrities, no one advertised Internet companies, online stores on radio and television, ” Walker later [said.](https://skift.com/history-of-online-travel/) Largely thanks to Shatner (and Priceline.com marketing director George Poster, who invited him), the service became recognizable. The actor remained the advertising face of the company until 2012.

As a result, Priceline.com almost became a victim of its own success. Since the demand was very high, there were not enough tickets for TWA and America West. As a result, the service began to resell what it bought from intermediaries. Losses began to grow rapidly, which is why by mid-1998 the company was on the verge of bankruptcy. And then Walker acted like a truly wise entrepreneur - he ceded the CEO post to a much more experienced manager, former Citigroup president Richard Braddock. “I’m good at finding resources, launching a business, and getting everything up and running early on, but I’m definitely not the right fit to run a $100 million company,” Walker admitted in an interview. After the change in leadership, the attitude towards Priceline.com changed: the heads of major airlines spoke to Braddock as an equal. The new CEO entered into a partnership with Delta, one of America's leading air carriers, which other key market players have since followed suit. Priceline.com survived its first crisis, and things are looking up.

In March 1999, the startup was preparing for an IPO. Revenue for the first year of operation [was] (https://money.cnn.com/1999/03/18/technology/feature_priceline/) $ 30.4 million, in total about 135 thousand tickets were sold. Priceline.com was far from profitable, with a loss of $114.4 million in 1998, but then, at the peak of the popularity of Internet companies, this did not bother anyone. On March 30, 1999, the service entered the stock exchange, at the time of opening the shares cost $16, a month later - $162.37.Growth [reached](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/day-market-history-priceline-ipo-134254700.html)914%. There were also important personnel changes - Braddock took over as chairman of the board of directors, and Daniel Shulman became CEO. Priceline.com began to expand its range of travel services and expanded into new businesses such as hotel reservations and car sales, as well as expanding into the UK and Asian markets. The company did not stop there: it soon created a service called WebHouse that sold food and gasoline on a “name your price” model. There were also subdivisions specializing in mortgage lending.

Aggressive expansion turned out to be a mistake. Analysts noted that for grocery retail, the “name the price yourself” model turned out to be unsuccessful, since each product has a cost that needs to be covered. This could not be done without a fixed price. Priceline.com was once again suffering serious losses, and its main travel division was faced with a lot of customer complaints - many, in particular, were not satisfied with long layovers. All these problems were superimposed on the general state of the IT segment in 2000: the “dot-com bubble” burst, the quotes of technology corporations collapsed (Priceline.com shares, which [cost](https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/BKNG/booking-holdings/stock-price-history) over $525 at the peak, fell to $7 at the end of the year), and investors began to shun the Internet. companies.

{{<ads>}}

Priceline.com was in dire need of a strategy overhaul, which led to the third change in CEO in two years, with Schulman replaced by former COO Jeffrey Boyd. “Transformation is not easy. We had to lay off a lot of employees, which was very hard, and cut costs. We got rid of all the directions that were not related to travel and mortgages, ” Boyd later [said .](https://skift.com/history-of-online-travel/) Also, Priceline.com left Australia and Japan and took up a serious improvement in customer service. Thanks to austerity and proper prioritization, the company was able to break even by the end of the second quarter of 2001.

However, the company's difficulties did not end there. On September 11, 2001, a series of four terrorist attacks was carried out in the United States, the largest in history in terms of the number of victims. The terrorists hijacked four passenger planes, two of which rammed the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York. After the tragedy, people were afraid to fly, the demand for air tickets and hotel rooms fell significantly. Experts predicted the death of the tourism industry. Priceline.com again faced an outflow of buyers, and the share price fell to $1.16. In 2003, the war in Iraq began, which also did not contribute to the growth in demand for air tickets. Then InterActive, which already owned Expedia, a platform for finding and booking flights and hotel rooms, bought another Priceline.com competitor, Hotwire.

Not only did Priceline.com continue to cut costs and get rid of its auto sales division, it also decided to make a major course correction. “Gradually, we realized that customers who were willing to put up with some of the inconveniences of the 'name your price' model were only a small part of the whole market, ” Boyd [said.](https://skift.com/history-of-online-travel/) “And companies like Travelocity and Expedia had more potential because they were targeting a wider audience.” Priceline.com moved beyond its "auction" concept and began to develop a traditional retail format where the price was set by the seller. As part of this strategy, in 2004 the company [bought](https://www.travelweekly.com/Travel-News/Hotel-News/Priceline-to-acquire-100-of-Travelweb) Travelweb hotel booking site, which collaborated with major hotel chains - Marriott, Hilton, Hyatt. The acquisition made it possible to reach an audience for which the brand and high quality were more important than savings. However, the “deal of the century” was yet to come.

Path to stability
-----------------

Since the late 1990s, Priceline.com and its US rivals Expedia and Hotels.com have struggled to gain a foothold in the European market, but have not been very successful. The problem was that US companies relied on collaboration with big players and familiar business models: Expedia and Hotels.com demanded prepayment from customers, Priceline.com followed the “name your price” principle. However, in Europe, unlike America, small hotel chains and non-chain hotels were much more popular. Local services took money from the guest after he moved out of the room - this gave travelers more freedom, allowed them to change plans on the go.

The American players understood that they had lost time and that the only way to gain a foothold in the region was to buy local players. In 2004, Priceline.com acquired the British service Active Hotels for $161 million, and a year later, the Dutch Booking.nl for $133 million, both firms were leaders in Europe. After the purchase, both European companies were merged into a single Booking.com brand. Priceline.com could have missed out on some life-changing deals: Expedia negotiated with both platforms, but the business models didn't work out because of mismatched business models. “Let's be honest, we had the same problem with Priceline, but they quite calmly let us work as usual,” Matt Witt, COO of Active Hotels (and later Booking.com), later recalled. — I can't say a single bad word about Priceline. They are amazingly smart." Really,

One of the important advantages of Booking.com was its pricing policy. Hotels could set their own prices, and the platform took a commission of 15%, while competitors' commissions reached 20-30%. Favorable conditions helped to attract small hotels to the platform, which were especially numerous in Europe. “There is no reason for the hotel to ask us to lower the commission, because all other players have higher commissions, ” Boyd [said.](https://www.forbes.com/forbes/2009/0824/travel-expedia-travel-how-priceline-survives-recession.html?sh=28712e346661) The company tried to think through such trifles as, for example, the possibility of previewing the page before publishing the offer on the site for hoteliers.

{{<ads>}}

Thoughtful marketing also played a role. Booking.com realized early on the full potential of Google's search advertising tools. Offers from the site were often the first thing the user saw when they “googled” a particular city.

The service was also able [to achieve](https://skift.com/2012/06/25/how-booking-com-conquered-world/) a large number of transitions within the site due to competent UX design. On the site, the user saw a map of the region he was interested in, on which the available hotels and apartments were marked. There were always “trigger” phrases next to the offers: “Last booking 40 minutes ago”, “There is only 1 room left on our site at this price”, “Free cancellation”, “Breakfast included” and others. At the bottom of the page of the hotel itself were recommendations for similar options. These Booking.com finds have since become the industry standard.

Thanks to a change of course and a successful deal, Priceline.com was finally able to overcome a long losing streak. If the company's revenue for 2005 [amounted to](https://ir.bookingholdings.com/news-releases/news-release-details/pricelinecom-reports-financial-results-4th-quarter-and-full-1) $962.7 million, and the volume of bookings - $2.2 billion, then the same figures for 2007 reached $1.41 billion (with an annual increase of 25.5%) and $4.8 billion, respectively. That same year, Priceline.com increased its presence in Asia with the acquisition of Singapore-based Agoda. "The online travel industry is still in its infancy in many Asian countries," [said](https://www.agoda.com/info/priceline.html?cid=1844104) Priceline.com director of corporate development Glenn Vogel. In addition, Priceline.com stopped charging commissions for booking air tickets, which became a serious competitive advantage for it.

However, before Priceline.com finally got on its feet, the global financial crisis broke out. In October 2008, after the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers investment bank, panic began in the markets. Investors feared that the recession would make people skimp on travel, and Priceline.com's stock, which hit $139 at the start of the year, plummeted to $47. But the strategic decisions of previous years this time helped the company avoid serious shocks. Revenue for 2008 increased by 33.7% to $1.9 billion. In 2009, due to the deepening of the recession, growth slowed slightly, revenue growth was 24.1%, but the results greatly exceeded analysts' expectations - online travel services [suffered](https://skift.com/2018/09/14/10-years-later-how-the-travel-industry-came-back-from-the-financial-crisis/)much less than other areas of the tourism industry. People still continued to travel, though not as actively. Many chose more "budget" destinations to save on airfare, and cheaper hotels, but still continued to buy them on the same sites as before.

{{<ads>}}

New challenges
--------------

By 2009, Priceline.com was already the undisputed leader in the hotel booking segment and over the following years continued to strengthen its position in the market through successful acquisitions. In 2010, the company [acquired](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-priceline-idUSTRE64H6HG20100518) the British car rental service TravelJigsaw and later renamed it Rentalcars.com. Three years later, the brand portfolio of the company, which changed its name to Priceline Group, was [replenished by](https://techcrunch.com/2012/11/08/priceline-com-acquires-kayak-for-1-8-billion/?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAIC88wqG6COb15bl7cR8TzuAUHu0tklPRsBmNvDqFcspPHj5jzeKY3dlqN2UEszs2LmQ5nWVQ1vm-rdke7V_3C5vrjx647jQPR87DZ6zLHgaMeNH-eXGpFk0HExrIkXLb8GSGRNDhw-wd7HRxM8FNgbwKadRw77MnFWoxVoy3Pjo) the Kayak.com airline ticket search platform, bought for $1.8 billion, and a year later, the restaurant reservation site OpenTable (the deal [amounted to](https://www.wsj.com/articles/priceline-to-buy-opentable-for-2-6-billion-1402660209) $2.6 billion), as well as hotel software companies Buuteeq and HotelNinjas. Over the next three years, Priceline Group bought several more companies, including aggregators Momondo and Cheapflights.

Since 2017, the company has also begun to actively develop a new direction for itself - the rental of apartments and apartments, as it felt threatened by a new competitor, Airbnb. And although Priceline Group was noticeably ahead of the rival in all financial indicators, Airbnb turned out to be more recognizable due to competent work with its brand. “We are bigger than them and no one knows about it. It just drives me crazy,” said Vice President of Priceline Group Mael Gavet. Indeed, the company remained the market leader for many years, but it was a set of brands that at first glance were not related to each other. This prompted the company to change its name again: in 2018, it was renamed Booking Holdings, which was logical, because Booking.com remained its main growth driver and source of revenue.

The most prosperous period in the company's history came to an abrupt end. In February 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic began: thousands of people were quarantined, borders between countries were closed. Travel dreams had to be postponed until better times. The next crisis turned out to be perhaps the most difficult for Booking Holdings: the corporation's revenue for 2020 [fell](https://www.phocuswire.com/booking-holdings-focuses-on-payment-platform-connected-trip-and-us-growth-as-q4-revenue-bookings-down-60-percent) by 55% compared to the previous year and amounted to $6.8 billion, the number of bookings decreased by 58%. In August 2020, the company [laid off](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/04/bookingcom-is-laying-off-up-to-25percent-of-its-workforce-due-to-coronavirus-downturn.html) 25% of its employees worldwide.

In 2021, the company, like the entire industry, began to gradually recover. Revenue for the year [reached](https://www.phocuswire.com/booking-holdings-closes-2021-with-better-than-expected-revenue-profit) $11 billion, which was significantly better than in 2020, but still worse than in 2019 - then the figure was $15.1 billion. Glenn Vogel, who has been CEO of Booking Holdings since 2017, looks at the situation without too much optimism. “A year ago, I said that it would take several years, not blocks, for \[the tourism industry\] to recover. It still takes years to catch up,” he [noted](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/travel-wont-recover-fully-from-covid-19-pandemic-for-years-booking-holdings-ceo-155209033.html) in May 2021.

{{<ads>}}

In the case of Booking Holdings, a strategy aimed at creating a “seamless travel” service should speed up the process: the ability to book everything you need for a trip on one platform. Thus, the company expects to remain competitive. Airbnb offers travelers not only accommodation, but also "experiences" - excursions and entertainment in a particular city, has seriously taken up the development of its own travel planning service and Google. To implement the new strategy, Booking Holdings has chosen a method proven over the years - mergers and acquisitions. In November 2021, the holding announced the purchase of Getaroom, a website for booking hotel rooms, for $1.2 billion (the main market for the company is the United States, where Booking Holdings is not as successful as in Europe), and just two weeks later, the [acquisition](https://skift.com/2021/11/23/booking-holdings-to-buy-flights-partner-etraveli-group-for-1-8-billion/) ETraveli Group ticket search platform for $1.8 billion. However, analysts [note](https://www.fool.com/investing/2022/04/22/can-this-powerhouse-stock-keep-beating-the-market/) that it will be very difficult for the holding to hold its positions. Booking Holdings remains a very large player, but travelers today are interested not only in great offers and proven brands, but also in the opportunity to get a unique experience - the same Airbnb is more in line with this request (in March 2022, both services suspended their work in Russia).

“The last two years have been difficult for the travel industry. But the curious thing is that people always want to travel, the demand is not going anywhere, - Vogel [said in an interview.](https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/travel-demand-picking-up-2022-will-be-another-recovery-year-booking-holdings-president-ceo/article65216980.ece) “When it’s safe, when governments lift restrictions, people will immediately start booking.”

**Author:** *Elizaveta Anokhina*