---
title: "Former head of eBay and Hewlett-Packard: “You need to run to the fire, not from the fire”"
description: Meg Whitman turned eBay into an e-commerce giant and successfully brought Hewlett-Packard out of the crisis, but her rich experience did not help her to succeed with her own startup. About blunders, ambitions in politics and saving a hopeless project - in a selection of her quotes
date: 2022-06-12T14:06:41+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T14:06:41+08:00
images:
- g2zE64k.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

About mistakes and determination
--------------------------------

Meg Whitman was invited to take over as CEO of eBay in February 1998. At that time, the company had only been on the market for three years, with about 30 employees, and the interface was something like a black-and-white bulletin board. Whitman also headed one of the divisions of the toy manufacturer Hasbro, where she supervised 600 employees. Therefore, for a long time she did not dare to move to a company with annual revenues of about $5 million (Hasbro's revenue in 1997 was $3.2 billion). However, the very idea of ​​a platform where buyers and sellers from different parts of the world could find each other eventually fascinated Whitman, and she accepted the offer. Already in September 1998, Whitman successfully brought the company to the stock exchange. “Investors did not immediately believe in our theory that the world is mostly inhabited by honest people. It seemed to them

However, the company was just getting on its feet, and it had a lot of problems. So, in the summer of 1999, due to the influx of traffic, the eBay website “lay” for 22 hours. Then Whitman arrived at the office at night and actually settled there with the developers for three months. In order to prevent such a problem from occurring again, Whitman took additional measures. She divided the products on the site into categories, increased the staff. She then started a tradition of hosting an annual meeting of top salespeople. In addition, all employees were required to regularly sell or buy something on eBay in order to evaluate the performance of the company on their own experience. Whitman herself also sold out the contents of the family's winter house in Colorado, chatting, monitoring reviews and ratings of sellers. So she saw if the company's ideas resonated with users. “Not all ideas work. The point is

According to Whitman, ideally, you should notice and correct a mistake before someone else notices it. “No matter how ambiguous, difficult and even paralyzing your circumstances may be, the price you pay for inaction, indecision and unwillingness to move forward is much higher than the price of a mistake. You don't have to be perfect to be an effective leader, but you certainly can't be timid,” she says. Whitman admits that she herself has been wrong more than once.

{{<ads>}}

So, Whitman considers one of his mistakes to be too late for the company to enter the Japanese market in 1999, where the Yahoo marketplace was already present. Due to competition, the company left the country two years later. Also, at some point, eBay decided that it was cheaper to develop their own payment system like PayPal, but then it became clear that this was not so fast and profitable. “Then we just quickly closed the project and bought PayPal,” Whitman recalls.

About politics and radical measures
-----------------------------------

In 2008, Whitman left eBay and entered politics. At that time, the company's revenue had already reached $ 8 billion, and the number of employees - 15 thousand people. Whitman invested a significant part of her fortune in the fight for the post of governor of California and lost. Politics disappointed her. She believes that "running eBay was a lot more fun than running for governor." “When you are involved in politics, you can always find acceptable and expected answers to journalists' questions. If we were in business to answer the questions of employees or shareholders in this way, we would have been fired a long time ago, ”she recalls that period.

Then Whitman returned to business. In 2011, she headed Hewlett-Packard, which was in a deplorable state. The year before she joined, the company's shares had fallen 42%. In three years, two CEOs have changed there - Whitman became the third. “The biggest problem was that in a very short period the corporation changed a lot of CEOs. And everyone had completely different strategies. Changes are “lowered” by the head office, but their influence is felt more strongly by regional branches. The company did not really understand which way it was going, so it was difficult for everyone to work, ”explains Whitman.

{{<ads>}}

At that time, the company was hopelessly losing to a competitor - Dell. Whitman, in order to understand where the problem is, directly asked the head of Microsoft, Steve Ballmer, why he gives orders to Dell, not HP. Microsoft soon sent a letter to Whitman listing nine reasons why HP was not receiving orders.

Whitman later recalled that "her hands itched to turn Hewlett-Packard in the right direction." The financial position of the company was unenviable. In 2012, revenue decreased by more than 5%. At the same time, in order to survive, Hewlett-Packard needed money to restart the “innovation machine”: research and development funding decreased year by year, and the company lagged behind its competitors. “When this happens, you need to change the cost structure to increase profits and find money to invest in things that will help save the company,” says Whitman.

She took drastic measures - laid off more than 60 thousand employees, rebuilt the sales system. But most importantly, Whitman divided the corporation into two companies - the manufacturer of personal computers and printers HP and Hewlett Packard Enterprise, which specializes in equipment and software for corporate clients. Each company focused on its own direction, increased the efficiency of resource allocation, which ultimately helped them to respond faster to changes and find new solutions. “Hewlett-Packard lacked responsiveness. In this industry, the future belongs to the fast. If there is a problem, you need to detect it in 24 hours and solve it in 48 hours. The practice of running into a fire instead of running from a fire was not part of the Hewlett-Packard corporate culture,” Whitman said.

About failure
-------------

Looking back on his experience, Whitman notes that leadership must be situational. “You can’t approach a startup and a company with a 75-year history with the same yardstick. While you are yourself, you must still adapt. Trying to find the keys to the leadership of different companies has always been one of the most exciting aspects of my career, ”she says. As Whitman recalls, in the case of eBay, everything was built from scratch, the company developed new markets, there was no “luggage” in the form of production, warehouses, stores. “HP is an industrial company, and with this cargo we went against the wind. On the other hand, we have a strong foundation on which everything could be built anew,” she reflects.

{{<ads>}}

And in 2017, for the second time in her career, Whitman decided to leave a large company for a startup. She stepped down from her positions at Hewlett Packard Enterprise and HP, and a year later set to work to launch mobile streaming service Quibi with ex-head of Walt Disney Studios and Dreamworks co-founder Jeffrey Katzenberg. It was supposed to be a platform with films, reality shows, comedies and newscasts, cut into videos up to ten minutes long and optimized for smartphones. The co-founders expected people to watch videos through the app while commuting or waiting in line. The company has raised $1.75 billion from investors including Alibaba.

However, the service was interrupted by the pandemic. It went live in April 2020 with millions of potential Quibi subscribers sitting at home. The founders did not count on this, the target audience was different, and users did not understand why they could not watch videos on TV. A week later, Quibi dropped out of the top 50 most downloaded free iPhone apps in the US. In addition, Quibi made a big bet on news releases, but interest in them was minimal.

“Quibi didn't succeed. This was likely due to one of two reasons: an idea that wasn't well thought out for a standalone streaming service, or a bad launch timing. Unfortunately, we will never know for sure, but we suspect it was a combination of both. We could not have foreseen the circumstances in the form of a pandemic, but other market players have faced the same unprecedented challenges and have overcome them. We couldn’t do it,” admitted Katzenberg and Whitman.

Another reason for the failure, experts called the tense relationship between Whitman and Katzenberg at the stage of preparing the project. Whitman threatened to step down as CEO of the company, believing that Katzenberg did not listen to her, undermined her authority and did not respect her. On top of that, neither Katzenberg nor Whitman seemed to understand what users wanted from streaming services or why services like TikTok and Netflix worked. It turned out that it is quite difficult to bring the company to the market with growing competition. And in the case of Quibi, this proved impossible because the two executives couldn't get along.

“We tried a lot of things over the summer, including free trials. We completely changed marketing with a lot of changes and tried a completely different business model in Australia,” Whitman recalls. But nothing helped, the startup needed additional capital in the first half of 2021. At the same time, it was clear that the company was unlikely to be able to attract him. “In the end we said the right thing to do was return the money to the shareholders,” Whitman says. As a result, six months after the launch, the service was closed.

_Sources: Harvard Business Review, marieclaire, Forbes, Fortune, Business Insider, Deadline, The Wall Street Journal, CNBC._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*