---
title: "I work a lot and spend little time with my child. Am I a bad parent?"
description: Torn between career and home, parents face guilt over not having enough contact with their children. Elena Kandybina, a family psychologist and Alter service specialist, advises what to do so that both an adult and a child remember their childhood happy
date: 2022-06-09T02:03:00+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T02:03:00+08:00
images:
- JyWeg4a.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Kenny Eliason / Unsplash'
authors:
- Elena Kandybina
interest: health
channel: 
- parenthood
- instructions
tags: 
---

Lots of time together = happiness?
----------------------------------

Late evening. You are sitting in the office again. You come home, hug your child, but it's time for the baby to sleep - and here it is, a nagging feeling of guilt: again there is no time left for the child, and no energy either ... What is it: our personal inability to build a work-life balance or a feature of modernity ?

If we, adult readers, remember our childhood, it will turn out that our parents spent much less time with us and were not as involved in children's activities as we are now. In the modern world, education is becoming more and more child-oriented: the child, his interests and hobbies are in the spotlight. The meeting of families with children now, most likely, will take place where the children will have fun, and the parents will be able to sit in a cafe nearby. Whereas even 20-30 years ago, the convenience of adults would have been more important, and children would only have been allocated a separate table and, at best, given board games.

{{<ads>}}

However, we still have the feeling that our parents loved and cared for us. Thinking about where it comes from, we admit that everything was somehow special with mother and father, not like with peers. Speaking about touching and important moments of childhood, we often talk about situations when an adult consoled us or listened attentively, or about joint activities that charged us with joy and drive. We remember how, offended by a girlfriend, they ran into the arms of their grandmother and received a delicious piece of cake. How they went with their grandfather for mushrooms, getting up at dawn, and when they returned, they sang funny songs. How they secretly talked with mom before going to bed, talking about how the day went. How they helped dad fix the car by giving tools. And when the whole family sat down to play their favorite board game together on their birthday, it was a real holiday.

Joy brings not the number of hours spent together, but the quality of communication. It includes the desire to understand the other, the ability to see in him an important person for you, the willingness to look for something interesting for both.

Is it always fun to be together?
--------------------------------

What determines whether communication will bring pleasure or boredom? Definitely not the amount of time spent on it. Each of us has memories of a long and terribly boring pastime: a boring meeting, a sad holiday, a conversation that we wanted to end as soon as possible. Being together for many hours is not always pleasant. But what then to do?

It happens that a parent draws an equal sign between entertainment, buying toys, fulfilling the desires of a child and a good relationship with him. But in this case, mom and dad turn into “pleasure machines” for children. And if “the machine does not work”, then the relationship disappears.

{{<ads>}}

Where is the magic wand?
------------------------

No wonder the character of the Soviet film "We'll Live Until Monday" said: "Happiness is when you are understood." It is important not only to be close to the child, but also to make the relationship meaningful, inspiring and joyful for him and for yourself.

What makes the fulfillment of parental duty a joy? First of all, sincere interest. Are you interested in how and how your child lives? Most likely, not at all by studying, but by cartoons about supermen and monsters, computer games or bloggers from TikTok. If suddenly such a list makes you sad, then try to find out why this is all so addictive for your child that he is ready to spend days and nights doing his favorite activities. Do not slip into moralizing and condemnation, saying: “But in my childhood ...” or “It would be better if I did something useful ...” - on the contrary, feel like a freshman who does not understand the intricacies of the subject at all, but listens with admiration to the professor. Perhaps something new and unexpected will open up to you, ideas of joint activities that are exciting for both you and the child will come to mind.

{{<ads>}}

And if you don't want to?
-------------------------

Often, when I, as a psychologist, begin to tell parents how to make communication with children emotionally rich, deep, memorable and inspiring, this does not arouse their enthusiasm. It is easier to go to a zoo or a trampoline center where the child will receive his dose of impressions than to cultivate interest within himself, try to understand what he is really interested in, show curiosity and admire. There is no energy for all this after work and household chores.

Raising children is also work, but we forget to allocate time and resources for it. Sometimes parents consider communication with a child a vacation and are surprised that they get tired of him more than from work. But at work, each of us is a specialist who easily copes with difficult tasks, and next to a child it is not always possible to be as confident and skillful as among colleagues. There are not enough skills and knowledge, we need “parenting skills courses” (but there is no time for them either).

Try to treat communication with your child as an additional activity: allocate and plan this time, think in advance what you will do - talk, play, watch a movie. Do not forget to set aside time for your own rest - now you work harder, which means you get more tired.

Ten tips for a parent who wants to communicate better with their child
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Here are ten tips that everyone can follow — and it's not always easy — to improve relationships with children, even if there is little time for communication.

{{<ads>}}

1\. Talk, play and do something with the children when you are in a good mood and have strength. Rest first.

2\. Plan communication with children, allocate time for this. Good relationships are more important than cleaning the apartment and working part-time.

3\. Make communication regular and predictable for the child. It is unlikely that one, even the most beautiful conversation can change something. Let you develop habits and traditions of communication. For example, agree that every night before going to bed you make plans for tomorrow together - this will not only bring you closer, but also help instill in your child the skill of planning.

4\. Recall what was interesting and fun for you to do as a child, and invite your child to do it together. Perhaps he will like it and everyone will have fun. So, I taught my son the game of my childhood “Dots”, and it was such a success that in his class they even held a tournament on it.

5\. Listen to your child with interest. If his classes seem boring or harmful to you, then try to at least understand why they are attractive to the child.

6\. Look for joint activities that both of you will enjoy. Do not often do what you do not like at all. In extreme cases, do alternately: first what the child likes, and then what you like.

7\. Together is the most important word. Try to interact more often: do something in turn, pass something to each other, etc.

8\. Name the child's feelings that you learn about from a conversation with him. It is enough to say, for example: "I see that you were very angry when you lost." It is not worth discussing the correctness of this feeling later - recognition is enough. So you show the child that you are there and understand him.

9\. Do not read morality, even if you learned about something unseemly in a conversation with your son or daughter. Rather, tell a story from your own life with a similar plot, discuss what you and the child have learned from this situation.

10\. When you are together, refrain from criticism - look for the good in each of you and in joint activities. Try to see something for which you can praise both yourself and the child, do not skimp on praise.

**Author:** *Elena Kandybina, family psychologist, specialist of the service for the selection of psychologists Alter*