---
title: "Former head of Tinkoff Oliver Hughes: the main thing for a banker is not to be a banker"
description: In 2007, Oliver Hughes stepped down as President of Visa in Russia to join Tinkoff, then a very young company, and turned it into one of Russia's most successful banks. About Tinkov, modern bankers and discipline in Russian business - in a selection of his quotes
date: 2022-06-12T14:02:48+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T14:02:48+08:00
images:
- jkdvVzq.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Vladimir Smirnov / TASS'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel:
- business guru 
tags: 
---

Controversial start
-------------------

Oliver Hughes met Oleg Tinkov in 2007, when he headed the Russian branch of the Visa global payment system. Then Tinkov came to one of the meetings with her managers and began to aggressively put pressure on Visa representatives, saying that they were losing to Mastercard in the credit card segment. Tinkov then had a strong argument with Hughes and realized that such a person was needed in his project. “This is Oleg's tactic. It was our first meeting, and now I know that at first he provokes, so that he would not be bored. He tests a person, brings him to emotions in order to understand where his strengths and weaknesses are. And then Oleg directs the discussion where he needs to, and turns on the charm. At the end of each meeting, he parted with people as good friends, ”Hughes later said.

At the next meeting, Tinkov offered Hughes a job at a bank. And he did not think long, because he was very impressed with the concept. “Essentially, these are the three Ds: direct marketing, direct acquisition channels and data-driven. Prior to that, I worked with the Russian financial market for ten years at Visa and understood that the industry was waiting for some changes, irritants, a new business model. And when Oleg’s idea, the model, the channels he wanted to use became clear to me, I believed in it immediately and strongly, ”explained Hughes.

The news of his move to Tinkoff caused a shock in the market. No one understood why a man who worked for eight years as the head of Visa moves to a small obscure bank.

{{<ads>}}

"Baptism by Fire"
-----------------

Hughes has an atypical career path in general. Yes, he is a linguist. “I worked in business, in Reebok logistics. at Shell. I've even been in retail in the oil business. He was a social science researcher at the British Library. Then at some point I ended up at Visa. But I was an IT person at Visa at the beginning, I programmed,” Hughes recalled. In 1998 he traveled to Russia to teach a course on Visa technical issues for Russian bankers. And the interpreter didn't come. Then Hughes did not lose his head and conducted a two-day course in Russian. This information reached the top management of Visa and he was sent to open the company's office in Russia.

Hughes was not involved in finance at Visa, so the transition to Tinkoff was a real challenge for him. “It was just a baptism in fire for me when I moved to Tinkoff Bank. I thought I would be in technology, customer, products, sales, distribution channels. But no,” he recalled. All tasks for Hughes were completely new. I had to learn on the go. According to him, it felt like he was "lifted up and thrown into the deep part of the pool - either sink or swim."

At the start, in 2007, no one even imagined that Tinkoff would grow into a large financial holding. “But then we had a fairly clear project. We wanted to reach breakeven, operating profit within a year and a half. In fact, this happened at the end of 2008. And Oleg Tinkov even then, in 2007-2008, thought about the exit. That is, we built a business in order to sell it. It was not a secret, and no one has ever denied it, ”recalls the entrepreneur. However, the sale did not take place, because in 2008-2009 there was a global financial crisis, and after that there were simply no buyers. And there weren't more of them in the following years.

As it turned out later, it was all for the best. “We changed strategy and started building a big story that was no longer meant to be sold,” Hughes said. In 2013, the bank held an IPO.

{{<ads>}}

Although Hughes headed Tinkoff Bank from the very beginning, people habitually believe that Oleg Tinkov was in charge of the bank. “Oleg is our spiritual father. We draw inspiration from him, he gives us advice,” Hughes said about the stage of his work in the TCS Group holding, which turned the once small Tinkoff Bank into.

Don't be a banker
-----------------

Hughes is sure that today the duties of a bank manager are fundamentally different from what they were 30 or even 10 years ago. “The most important quality for a modern banker is not to be a banker,” Hughes is sure. Today's head of the bank should think about completely different things - about a mobile application, about technology, about a good interface, service integration, and so on. “And if you don’t rummage around in this, then you won’t go far,” the entrepreneur added.

The modern banker must dive into the data, the entrepreneur believes. He encourages executives to understand business performance, to be deep in numbers - then you can manage the situation through data. “Without data, you are just blind at the helm, nothing will come of it,” the banker added.

Hughes believes that in any business, including banking, the main thing is not to be afraid, gradually adapt to the ongoing changes. “Because if you are afraid, if you panic, your brain turns off. You can't panic. It is necessary to communicate with people, to attract their experience, ”said Hughes.

According to Hughes, now in order to compete in the financial market, you need to "develop and bring to market new products, interface solutions, technological innovations." Therefore, employees must have the appropriate competencies. “And it depends on the ability in the field of technology: imagine, implement and launch. Not everyone can do it in principle. And those who cannot, sooner or later will be "corpses," he said.

{{<ads>}}

Caution and discipline
----------------------

According to Hughes, success is when a company grows, does interesting things, offers innovative solutions, and satisfied customers. He is confident that the “entrepreneurial spirit” in the team will help achieve this, when employees do not try to shift responsibility to each other. This requires a high level of self-discipline and intrinsic motivation. “Our employees have a high level of self-motivation, we do not hire others. It cannot be said that we have a puritanical work ethic - it is more about me, ”said the banker.

Hughes noted that employees in Russia have some problems with discipline: for example, they are often late for meetings. In England, this simply will not work, but in Russia you have to fight it. “I don’t like that Russians talk a lot on the phone or among themselves during a meeting – there is no discipline and respect for other people’s time. It pisses me off,” Hughes added.

Hughes admitted that he is a very cautious person in terms of bringing new products to the market. “The incubation period can be long. Although we look aggressive and quite bold in marketing, we act in a measured manner. But when we decide, we launch quickly, ”said the banker.

Eternal Crisis
--------------

Hughes believes that business is an endless crisis, because even when everything is good, there is always a lack of people, development, technological capabilities. And then, sooner or later, the real crisis comes. Tinkoff went through three crises, in 2008-2009, 2014-2015 and 2020. Hughes calls the 2008 global financial crisis a useful "inoculation" for business. This moment gave important lessons for the further management of the company. “Thanks to this, we know what to do, how to protect the business and even how to develop during the crisis. Since we always proceed from the fact that sooner or later there will be a crisis, we always keep a large supply of liquidity, ”said the banker.

{{<ads>}}

Hughes believes that it is always necessary to prepare for difficult times - in any business, especially in emerging markets. “You always have to be in good shape. This means that you need to look at all real indicators, they are in any business, not only in a bank. You should always think about currency risks, how you hedge your positions in the long run, what about funding, financing your business, ”he urged.

Oliver Hughes is one of two former co-directors of TCS Group, an executive director on the board of directors of TCS Group (from 2021 to March 2022), and previously was the chairman of the board of Tinkoff Bank (2007-2020).

Hughes was born in the UK in 1970. In 1992 he graduated from the University of Sussex. From 1998 to 2007 he worked for Visa International. In 2005, he became the head of the Visa International representative office in Russia. The team of the Russian representative office under his leadership increased the payment turnover from about $1 billion to $100 billion by 2007, occupying more than 50% of the market.

From 2007 to 2021, he was Chairman of the Board of TCS Bank, later renamed Tinkoff Bank. From March 2021 to March 2022 - CEO of TCS Group, served as Executive Director on the Board of Directors of TCS Group. At the end of March 2022, Hughes resigned from the board of directors, and on April 23 he finally left the company.

By 2022, under the leadership of Hughes, Tinkoff Bank ranked 13th in terms of assets among Russian banks and became one of 13 banks included by the Bank of Russia in the list of systemically important credit institutions.

{{<ads>}}

Motivation is not money
-----------------------

The banker said that the main motivation for him is not money, but an idea. “You don’t motivate me with money. I'm interested in the idea. You refine it, you understand that there is something here, some kind of theme that can be implemented. You implement it. You bring it to the end, you launch it. And during this process, I get high,” he shared.

In addition, Hughes likes the opportunity to change the lives of other people. “It's a very cool feeling. We do cool things that affect the lives of tens of millions of Russians,” the banker said.

Another motivational factor he called teamwork. “When you work with very smart and capable people to realize this common idea and goal, it’s very cool,” added Hughes.

In April 2022, Hughes left TCS Group along with holding co-head Pavel Fedorov. They decided to develop their own project — a fintech startup that will operate in Asian markets.

_Sources: Banki.ru, Forbes, Vedomosti, THE BELL, Harvard Business Review Russia, Roscongress website, VC.ru, Tinkoff Private Talks_

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*