---
title: "The head of Epic Games: “I forced Microsoft and Sony to agree”"
description: Tim Sweeney created one of the largest game development companies in the world, Epic Games, and got involved in a fight with Apple and Google for fair competition. About a modest lifestyle, approach to hiring and the future of the metaverses - in a selection of his statements
date: 2022-06-12T13:58:53+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T13:58:53+08:00
images:
- wbnwPPN.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Philip Pacheco / Getty Images'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

About inspiration
-----------------

Though Epic Games founder and CEO Tim Sweeney owns a net worth of around $8 billion, he leads a fairly modest and reclusive lifestyle. He has no family or children. His company is located far from Silicon Valley, and he himself likes to go hiking and eat at inexpensive eateries. Only once did he buy two sports cars, but then sold them as unnecessary.

And the career of an entrepreneur did not work out for him at first. While studying at university, he tried to create his own consulting business, but did not succeed. Then he came to grips with computer games: Sweeney began to be interested in programming at school. “I grew up at a time when anyone could program. My first computer was an Apple II. When you turn it on, a hint for the programming language appears. So I always felt that open platforms were the key to free markets and the future of computing,” Sweeney recalls.

This is how Epic Games was born. The real success came to Sweeney in 1998 after the release of the three-dimensional shooter Unreal, which later grew into a whole game series. At the same time, the company began selling licenses for the Unreal Engine game engine to other developers. In 2006, the company released Gears of War for the Xbox 360. The game sold over 3 million copies in ten weeks, becoming the fastest-selling game of 2006.

Sweeney says that the inspiration he draws from the real world helps in developing games. In particular, he appreciates the ability to recreate in the game what he sees around him, to detail and at the same time maintain the performance of the gameplay itself. “During the development of Unreal One, I was in Canada, it was cold, I was walking down the street, and there was a lot of fog everywhere. There were these street lamps with big balls of fog. I said oh I can program it! So one of the main features of the Unreal One engine was the ability to create fog, ”he says.

{{<ads>}}

On the success of Fortnite
--------------------------

The next turning point for Sweeney and Epic Games came in 2017. Then the company released the game Fortnite, which became extremely popular. Just a few months after the release, more than 200 million gamers registered in the game on seven gaming platforms. The number of registered users as of May 2020 was already 350 million.

The entrepreneur claims that he did not create Fortnite, his employees did. He emphasizes that he did not design or program the game. “I think what I'm most proud of is not what Fortnite created. And the fact that I created and nurtured the company that created Fortnite, ”says Sweeney.

Prior to Fortnite, the most popular franchises in the gaming business were Call of Duty and Grand Theft Auto, which people played on PlayStation, Xbox or PC. It cost about $60, you could play alone or with friends who had the same consoles. Epic did otherwise. The company has made Fortnite free and released it on all major gaming devices - consoles, computers, smartphones and tablets. The company is constantly improving the game so that gamers discover something new. However, despite all the positives, Fortnite had a problem: the owner of the most popular console, Sony's PlayStation 4, could not play with the owner of Microsoft's Xbox One.

Therefore, Sweeney spent almost six months in 2018 negotiating with two IT giants. He asked them to do the almost unthinkable - to make their systems work together. “An attempt at international diplomacy. Given the long-standing rivalry between these companies, it was not an easy discussion,” recalls Sweeney.

As negotiations continued, Sweeney worked to bring Fortnite to the Japanese Nintendo's Switch console. He also wanted the Switch to support cross-play with the consoles of the Japanese company's competitors. In June 2018, Nintendo agreed to this with Microsoft, and then with Sony. “It was one of the greatest moments in the history of Epic Games. I felt content and tired,” admits Sweeney. Epic Games actually turned Fortnite into a large-scale social network, since it was now possible to play it simultaneously on consoles from different manufacturers.

{{<ads>}}

About the lawsuit with Apple and Google
---------------------------------------

In the summer of 2020, Epic Games introduced two payment options in Fortnite - via Apple Pay with a fee, or directly to creators without a fee. In response, the game was removed from the App Store. Then Epic Games filed a lawsuit, accusing Apple of violating antitrust laws. Later, a similar situation occurred with the Google Play Store.

Epic Games has repeatedly expressed dissatisfaction with the terms of the App Store for game developers: of the amount paid by the buyer, Apple takes 30% for itself, 70% goes to the developer. Sweeney believes that this commission is too high and Apple, using its monopoly position, dictates terms to application creators. “The most disturbing thing about Apple’s position is that they believe they “own” all the trade related to their smartphones, and consider direct payment to developers as almost smuggling and shoplifting. This is a crazy, misguided view,” Sweeney wrote on Twitter. He is convinced that a single app store is needed that works with all platforms.

Sweeney notes that he is not fighting for low commissions. “Epic Games is fighting for fair competition between mobile platforms, stores and payment systems. If there was a 30% commission on iOS, but the platform was open to competition, we would gladly return, ”he noted.

Epic Games eventually made its own Epic Games Store for gamers. It also charges a fee, but less than Google and Apple. “This is the situation where the developer gets the most revenue from their game. It's great for us too - we earn a few percent. Nor do we triple, quadruple, or quintuple our spending. This is a great trend for the industry and more opportunities for developers,” notes Sweeney. According to him, gamers don’t appreciate it, they don’t care how much money anyone gets, but for a developer company this is very important - “at 70% it can go bankrupt, and at 88% it can have money left for the development of the studio.”

About the search for employees
------------------------------

Sweeney says that he is looking for people very slowly, because he tries to attract real professionals. According to him, this is possible if the company is interesting and attractive to work with. “From time to time we are looking for someone for a certain position, but it often takes six months before we find the right person,” he says.

The entrepreneur says that there are two sides to game programming - graphics and the gameplay itself. In the first, the most important thing is beautiful visuals, and in the second, pleasure. Therefore, the Epic Games team has different people who are involved in different processes.

When creating games, Sweeney finds it important to strike a balance between simplicity and performance. “The code needs to run fast enough for the gameplay to work well. There is also the issue of simplicity. If you have the choice to write 10 lines of code or 20 lines, but a little better, then it's usually better to do it in 10 lines, because you end up with a huge amount of code that you have to deal with every day,” Sweeney adds.

{{<ads>}}

{{<info>}}
Tim Sweeney is the founder of the video game company Epic Games.

Sweeney was born in 1970 in Maryland, USA. In 1989, Sweeney entered the University of Maryland, where he studied mechanical engineering. Sweeney founded the consulting business Potomac Computer Systems, but was not successful. Then Sweeney, within the same company, began to create computer games. In 1991, the company released its first game, ZZT. The company later changed its name to Epic MegaGames. In 1998, Epic MegaGames released Unreal, a 3D first-person shooter, followed by the Unreal Engine, a platform for creating games that other developers could use. In 1999, the company changed its name to Epic Games and moved to North Carolina.

In 2019, British video game industry magazine MCV named Sweeney "Person of the Year". Also at the 2020 Forbes Media Awards, Sweeney was selected as "Person of the Year". Forbes estimates his net worth at $7.6 billion.
{{</info>}}

About the metaverse
-------------------

Metaverses are a trend that Sweeney is particularly interested in. In the end, even Fortnite is turning into an online space where people communicate and famous musicians hold virtual concerts. In his opinion, this is a market with the potential for several trillion dollars.

“The next three years will be important for all companies striving for the metaverse, such as Epic, Roblox, Microsoft, Meta (recognized as an extremist organization whose activities are banned in Russia. - _RBC Pro_ ). This is a fight for a billion users, and whoever gets that billion first will continue to set the standard in the marketplace,” Sweeney said.

According to the entrepreneur, his fight against Apple and Google is partly motivated by the desire to create fair conditions for companies competing in the metaverse market. “The Metaverse is a term similar to the Internet. No company can own it,” Sweeney emphasizes.

To fill this new niche, Epic Games plans to increase the number of Fortnite players from 60 million to 1 billion in the future and also make the most of its own tools, in particular the Unreal Engine tool for creating 3D graphics. According to Sweeney, Epic Games is working to "create a single set of digital tools that can be used in film and television, as well as in real-time games - from high-end consoles to budget smartphones." And although the entrepreneur does not think that specialized equipment like augmented or virtual reality glasses will be required to access the metaverse, the company is already collaborating with manufacturers of such devices.

_Sources: [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) , CNN, Gamedeveloper and Eurogamer interviews, Tim Sweeney's Twitter account, The Wall Street Journal, Business Insider._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*