---
title: 'Development "without interference": what analysts said about the 2008 crisis'
description: The economists who predicted the crisis of 2007-2008 are predicting new shocks for the US economy. The question is whether they will be more far-sighted than their colleagues this time. How analysts were wrong in their forecasts on the eve of the Great Recession
date: 2022-06-09T15:56:41+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T15:56:41+08:00
images:
- ehyDh91.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Scott Olson/Getty Images'
authors:
- Nikita Glazkov
interest: investments
channel: 
- economic trends
tags: 
---

The financial crisis of 2007-2008 is usually compared to the stock market crash of 1929, which brought to life the biggest economic shock in US history - the Great Depression. Ben Bernanke, who met the crisis as chairman of the Fed, went even further and said that September and October 2008 were worse in their consequences than the events of the 1930s. Of course, not everyone agreed with him, although Bernanke studied the Great Depression, and the essays he wrote about this period were published in book form as early as 2000.

Meanwhile, now investors around the world are concerned about the approach of another recession in the United States, which, under a number of circumstances, may develop into a global crisis. As usual in such cases, market participants listen to economists and famous analysts. And what is especially alarming is that many of those who were not mistaken when predicting the crisis of 2007-2008 are talking about the coming problems for the US economy.

The events of those years were caused by the formation of a bubble in the US mortgage market, which was preceded by a reduction in the key rate from 6.5% in 2000 to 1% in 2003. The fall in the cost of mortgage loans provoked by him led to a rush in the real estate market. The banking institutions that issued the loans resold them to Wall Street investment banks that issued mortgage bonds backed by a pool of mortgages. The scheme was so beneficial to banks that they even issued mortgages to borrowers with unreliable or short credit histories (in other words, subprime borrowers). The trap for many of them was that they were getting mortgages at floating rates. In June 2004, the Fed began to raise the key rate, so that in 2006 it reached 5.25%. Around the same time, real estate prices peaked and began to fall. Loan defaults began, and high-risk borrowers found themselves in a situation where, even if they sold their depreciated real estate, they would still remain in debt. This led to a series of bankruptcies of subprime creditors as early as early 2007 and a sharp drop in the value of mortgage-backed derivatives. At the same time, subprime loans already accounted for about a fifth of mortgage loans, and rating agencies recognized the reliability of securities secured by them. This meant that the latter were in the portfolios of many institutional investors. The mortgage crisis could no longer pass without consequences for the entire US financial system. moreover, borrowers with a high level of risk found themselves in a situation where, even if they sold their depreciated real estate, they would still remain in debt. This led to a series of subprime bankruptcies as early as early 2007 and a sharp drop in the value of mortgage-backed derivatives. At the same time, subprime loans already accounted for about a fifth of mortgage loans, and rating agencies recognized the reliability of securities secured by them. This meant that the latter were in the portfolios of many institutional investors. The mortgage crisis could no longer pass without consequences for the entire US financial system. moreover, borrowers with a high level of risk found themselves in a situation where, even if they sold their depreciated real estate, they would still remain in debt. This led to a series of bankruptcies of subprime creditors as early as early 2007 and a sharp drop in the value of mortgage-backed derivatives. At the same time, subprime loans already accounted for about a fifth of mortgage loans, and rating agencies recognized the reliability of securities secured by them. This meant that the latter were in the portfolios of many institutional investors. The mortgage crisis could no longer pass without consequences for the entire US financial system. This led to a series of subprime bankruptcies as early as early 2007 and a sharp drop in the value of mortgage-backed derivatives. At the same time, subprime loans already accounted for about a fifth of mortgage loans, and rating agencies recognized the reliability of securities secured by them. This meant that the latter were in the portfolios of many institutional investors. The mortgage crisis could no longer pass without consequences for the entire US financial system. This led to a series of bankruptcies of subprime creditors as early as early 2007 and a sharp drop in the value of mortgage-backed derivatives. At the same time, subprime loans already accounted for about a fifth of mortgage loans, and rating agencies recognized the reliability of securities secured by them. This meant that the latter were in the portfolios of many institutional investors. The mortgage crisis could no longer pass without consequences for the entire US financial system.

{{<ads>}}

Faith in potential
------------------

Meanwhile, in their forecasts for 2007, analysts at the leading investment banks were still "cautiously optimistic", referring to the growth of corporate profits for the year, the increase in the number of mergers and acquisitions and the suspension of the tightening of the US Federal Reserve's monetary policy. Abby Joseph-Cohen, chief investment strategist at Goldman Sachs, noted that despite the slowdown in the real estate sector, the situation will develop favorably in the consumer sector, the tourism industry, the restaurant industry and the entertainment industry. On the whole, she said, the economy would develop "without interference." And the chief US economist of the notorious Lehman Brothers, whose collapse in the fall of 2008 became a landmark event for the onset of the crisis, emphasized that "the market still has potential for growth." Although he added,_RBC Pro_ ).

Perhaps the most famous and high-profile optimist was US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, who noted in November 2006 that the worst of the housing market was over. Probably Greenspan should have said it. However, he denied the possibility of a crisis back in 2002. At a meeting of the Joint Economic Committee, Greenspan explained that compared to the stock market, which recently survived the dot-com bubble, this will not happen with real estate, since transaction costs in this market are high and opportunities for speculation are limited. And in 2003, he opined that it was "too far" from a housing overheating to a stock market bubble.

Doctor Fatum and other pessimists
---------------------------------

But there were those who foresaw both the subprime crisis and its consequences for the US economy. As early as September 2003, Carl Case of Wellesley College and Robert Schiller of Yale University pointed to an increase in investment property purchases in a report to the Brookings Institution. “A lot of people are excited about buying a home as prices go up. But that’s precisely why they are growing, because there is such a hype around, ”Schiller said in an interview with NPR radio station in 2005. \- Many have heard Greenspan's words that there are a lot of local bubbles in the market now, so there won't be one main one. From a technical point of view, he is right. However, enthusiasm is contagious: it spreads farther and makes its way even into those areas where stability previously reigned.

Already at the end of 2006, the famous economist Paul Krugman wrote in his column in The New York Times that "2007 will be a very difficult year." He compared the prevailing uncertainty to 2001, when most analysts failed to realize that the US was slipping into recession. Krugman wrote that it was the housing boom that was the main driver of economic growth from 2003 to 2006, and pointed to the inversion of the yield curve. “Since last summer, when the collapse of the mortgage market became apparent, there has been a strong drop in yields on long-term bonds. Now they are lower than short-term yields. The fact that investors are ready to buy these long-term securities indicates that they are waiting for lower interest rates. And this only happens during a recession that forces the Fed to lower its key rate. Respectively,

Among the pessimists was New York University professor Nouriel Roubini, even nicknamed Doctor Fatum, after one of the villains of Marvel comics. In early 2008, when the US economy had already entered a recession, his article was published entitled "On the risks of a systemic financial crisis: 12 steps to disaster." In it, he described in detail the possible development of the crisis and, in particular, said that “one or two systemically important brokers will go bankrupt”, that is, he actually predicted the collapse of investment banks Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers.

{{<ads>}}

Now these economists are seeing the approach of a new crisis. So, in July 2021, Roubini wrote in an article for The Guardian that the American economy is moving towards stagflation like that observed in the 1970s. Moreover, “the looming crisis may combine the worst features of the stagflation of the 1970s and the crisis of 2007-2010,” the economist wrote. “At the moment, loose monetary and fiscal policies continue to fuel bubbles in the stock market and in the lending segment <…>. The warning signs are already there: significant excess of company values ​​over profits, low risk premiums, inflated housing and technology stock prices, unjustified hype over SPACs, cryptocurrencies, high-yield corporate and loan-backed bonds, private equity, meme stocks and intraday speculation. At some point, this boom will result in a sudden loss of confidence in the future of the economy, and the tightening of monetary policy will be the trigger for the collapse. Analyst Jesse Colombo, who predicted the 2008 crisis, even before the pandemic found signs of overvaluation of assets in 20 markets, in particular in the US stock market, corporate debt, educational loans and real estate. Concern about the formation of bubbles in the housing, stock and cryptocurrency markets was also repeatedly expressed by Robert Shiller, saying that these segments remind him of the Wild West in terms of the moods prevailing in them. even before the pandemic, he found signs of asset overvaluation in 20 markets, in particular in the US stock market, corporate debt, educational loans and real estate. Concern about the formation of bubbles in the housing, stock and cryptocurrency markets was also repeatedly expressed by Robert Shiller, saying that these segments remind him of the Wild West in terms of the moods prevailing in them. even before the pandemic, he found signs of asset overvaluation in 20 markets, in particular in the US stock market, corporate debt, educational loans and real estate. Robert Schiller has repeatedly expressed concern about the formation of bubbles in the housing, stock and cryptocurrency markets, saying that these segments remind him of the Wild West in terms of the prevailing sentiments in them.

Analysts do not dismiss the possibility that, against this background, the Fed will start raising the rate at a faster pace. However, given the current volume of borrowing, this could lead to another debt crisis. Many believe that the alternative to this step is double-digit inflation, but, according to Nouriel Roubini, even if the Central Bank allows it, a crisis is still inevitable due to the fact that problems with servicing debts denominated in foreign currency will arise in developing countries.

Paul Krugman also believes that the current situation is more difficult than on the eve of the 2007-2008 financial crisis. At the same time, he notes that the current - low - level of rates will not leave officials room to maneuver in the event of a recession that will require rate cuts to revive the economy: “Whatever the shock - and it will certainly happen - the problem is that we have there are no more tools to absorb its effects.” Thus, well-known economists who predicted the crisis of 2007-2008 expect that the next one will be quite comparable in scale.

{{<ads>}}

Even after the global crisis of 2007-2008 passed into a decisive phase, many articles appeared about why academic economists could not foresee its onset. After all, despite the presence of anxious moods, few of them spoke with confidence about the crisis. In 2011, Simon Potter of the New York Fed named three main factors. First of all, this is a misunderstanding of the nature of the mortgage crisis, in particular, ignoring the overvaluation of the market and, accordingly, the possibility of a sharp drop in prices. Secondly, there is insufficient knowledge of mortgage financial products. And thirdly, the fact that economists underestimated the relationship between the financial system and the real sector of the economy. “They didn’t just miss the crisis, but they said with all certainty that it would not happen,” Franklin Allen reasoned, currently professor at Imperial College London. “They just didn’t believe banks were that important.” Some, like Allen, see the problem in mathematical models that were not complete enough, someone, like Sidney Graham Winter, a professor at the Wharton School of Business, notes the underestimation of psychological factors (which Schiller is studying, in particular). To date, economists have probably learned from the mistakes of the past. But even so, it is unlikely that they can describe in detail the further course of events when there is so much uncertainty in the market. notes the underestimation of psychological factors (which are studied, in particular, by Schiller). To date, economists have probably learned from the mistakes of the past. But even so, it is unlikely that they can describe in detail the further course of events when there is so much uncertainty in the market. notes the underestimation of psychological factors (which are studied, in particular, by Schiller). To date, economists have probably learned from the mistakes of the past. But even so, it is unlikely that they can describe in detail the further course of events when there is so much uncertainty in the market.

Meanwhile, as now, the facts cited by the most successful forecasters in the early 2000s were available to any specialist or observer. Topics such as asset overvaluation, bubbles in certain segments of the financial market, yield curve inversion and Fed connivance make headlines. And for now, investors can choose how to treat them.

**Author:** *Nikita Glazkov*
