---
title: "Hold on: why you can't force workers to be strong"
description: Encouraging phrases, calls to "get together" and "show resilience" addressed to the employee are just a way to brush off the problems that he faced. In order for an employee to receive real support in the company, it is necessary to change the approach to managing a team
date: 2022-06-08T16:22:51+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T16:22:51+08:00
images:
- qYGZ6HK.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Linda Morbe / Unsplash'
authors:
- Liz Fosslien
interest: management
channel: 
- team management
tags: 
---

Lately, the call to perseverance seems to be the answer to just about everything. Are you having a hard time with toxic co-workers? Just be strong and be patient. Struggling to homeschool your kids while working 50-hour weeks during the pandemic? Try to be resilient.

Resilience, or the ability to face adversity and bounce back from difficult events, is useful when it comes to work. But all too often it turns out that management asks employees to endure all the difficulties that fall to their lot with a smile and patience, and at the same time not to disturb their colleagues. However, management overlooks important structural issues.

In fact, it is much easier to deal with problems if there is support from others. Let’s say your team’s priorities suddenly changed or everyone had to switch to remote work overnight. It will be easier for you to readjust and find the strength to think about your next steps if you trust your manager, are not afraid to share your feelings with your team, and trust that the company will support you.

In other words, there is a difference between the requirement to demonstrate psychological resilience and real concern for the mental health of employees. The past few years have shown that uncertainty and difficult situations are often beyond our control. But how managers react—whether they create an environment in the workplace where employees feel supported, or pressure them until they burn out and give up—we can influence. The authors of Strong Emotions: How to Be OK When Things Are Wrong, Liz Voslien and Molly West Duffy, share five tips to help create a supportive team environment.

**1\. Make mindfulness a collective practice**

Teams can apply collective practices to care for the psychological well-being of employees. As a leader, ask yourself the question: “How can my team achieve balance in their daily activities?” Claims that employees should have a healthy work-life balance are great. However, if their schedule is full of back-to-back meetings and they need to be in touch at any time of the day, then they simply will not have time to rest.

{{<ads>}}

Joint practices will help take care of the well-being of employees. When the level of uncertainty is high, these techniques will help to achieve emotional stability and reduce stress levels. It doesn't matter what method it is. Research shows that simply doing the same activities at the same time is good for mental health.

Here are a few ideas Vosslien and West Duffy learned from employees at different companies. Start your weekly team meetings with a fun question for everyone in attendance, make a collective commitment to completely video-free one or two days a week, and schedule daily 15-minute team breaks. One manager also asks employees to turn off their cameras for five minutes at the beginning of a meeting and do something to help them relax and focus on the topic of the meeting, such as replying to an email or getting up to stretch.

**2\. Look back and evaluate your team's progress**

Practices aimed at analyzing the results of joint work and recognizing merits will also help employees find a common language and create an atmosphere of trust. The result of successful teamwork in a time of change and uncertainty is not the creation of some ideal plan of action, but the confidence that together you can cope with unforeseen circumstances.

To evaluate team performance, set aside time at the end of each month or quarter to discuss the following questions:

*   What have we learned in the last few weeks or months?
*   What caused the difficulty and how could we have approached the problem differently given what we know now?
*   What significant progress have we made?

Do not forget that an important component of success is the conclusions drawn. If your team has had to quickly reorganize and prioritize differently, this does not mean that you are behind the level where you should be. This means that you are moving in a new direction and that you have gained important experience.

{{<ads>}}

**3\. Use one-on-one meetings to your advantage**

If your one-to-one meetings are limited to just talking about the state of affairs in the company, you are missing out on a valuable opportunity to better understand and support your subordinates. Worse, you may unwittingly give the impression that you only care about urgent tasks and affairs. Because of this, employees will begin to underestimate their role in the team, stress levels will increase.

Find an alternative channel for breaking company news (such as email, Slack discussion threads, or short employee meetings) to allow more time for face-to-face conversations. Fosslien and West Duffy recommend that leaders ask the following questions:

*   What can I do to support you this week?
*   In what aspects of your work do you need more freedom and flexibility?
*   Are you satisfied with your current workload? How can I help?
*   What decision, what task were you satisfied with last week? What turned out to be difficult?

Be sure to take action on what you heard and communicate how you intend to proceed. For example: “Last week you mentioned that you needed more rest time. Let's see together if there are any upcoming meetings that can be rescheduled for next week."

**4\. Remember that everyone expresses their emotions in different ways.**

While it's important to give employees the opportunity to express their feelings and concerns, don't force them to do so. If the situation is difficult and the future seems uncertain, let your subordinates know that you are ready to support them. But make it clear that they may not tell you all the details.

Some people are comfortable with openly expressing their feelings, while others are not so comfortable - everyone is at a certain point on the emotional spectrum. On one side are over-emotional people who openly share all their experiences. People around always know how such people feel, and usually turn to them when they want to "recharge" emotionally.

At the other end of the spectrum are under-emotional people who are less likely to express their feelings. People prefer to turn to them for support if they are upset or have a problem, since a low-emotional person will be able to calmly find a way out of the current situation. In the middle of the spectrum are people who moderately express emotions. They can oscillate towards one of two extremes depending on the situation. None of these characteristics are "good" or "bad," but it's useful to know where your subordinates (and yourself!) are on the spectrum so that you can adjust your behavior if necessary.

For example, suppose that one of your subordinates is a low-emotional person. If he feels he can't handle a lot of uncertainty, then he won't flaunt those emotions and most likely won't talk about it in a one-on-one meeting. Therefore, as his boss, you should dig a little deeper and try to get him to have a confidential conversation: “What in your job keeps you up at night? What I don't know should I know about?"

**5\. Find common ground**

To make it easier for employees to trust each other, it is useful to develop a common communication system in the team. For example, teams at consulting firm Reboot use a red, yellow, green color scoring system at the start of meetings. Red color signals that someone is having difficulty; yellow - that someone is experiencing stress that can be dealt with; green means everything is ok.

{{<ads>}}

Fosslien and West Duffy also worked with different teams to help them create "permission lists". The idea came from writer Giles Turnbull, who wanted new members of the United Kingdom's government digital service to know that it's okay to make mistakes or ask questions. He made a list, approached colleagues for new ideas, and then designed posters to hang around the office. Each had a phrase starting with "It's OK...", such as "It's OK to say you don't understand", "It's OK to want to be quiet" and "It's OK to ask why yes and why not".

The "It's okay..." lists list permissions that may already exist in the company's culture, but that it's good to remind people about, especially in uncertain times and when hiring new employees. In addition to general documents that list the basic principles of organizing the workflow, colleagues can tell each other about their personal work style.

Uncertainty and change are inevitable. But by applying the methods listed above, leaders can create an atmosphere for their employees in which it will be easier for them to show resilience. Ultimately, the best and most successful companies are those where people feel supported during difficult times.

{{<info>}}
_About the authors:_

_Liz Fosslien is the Head of Content and Communications at Humu, a consulting firm specializing in corporate workflow. Molly West Duffy is the International Director of Training and Development at Perkins & Will. They are co-authors of Strong Emotions: How to Be OK When Things Are Wrong (Portfolio, 2022) and No Offense: The Secret Power of Embracing Emotions at Work (Portfolio, 2019)._
{{</info>}}

###### This material was first published in the MIT Sloan Management Review or at [https://sloanreview.mit.edu/.](https://sloanreview.mit.edu/.) The original article can be read [at the link](https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/stop-telling-employees-to-be-resilient/) . © 2022. All rights reserved. Material courtesy of Tribune Content Agency.

**Author:** *Liz Fosslien, Molly West Duffy*
