---
title: "DoorDash co-founder: a great idea is not enough to start a business"
description: 'Everyone around believed that no one needed another food delivery service, but this did not stop DoorDash co-founder Andy Fan. About intuition, life-changing decisions and business scaling - in a selection of his statements'
date: 2022-06-13T11:50:04+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T11:50:04+08:00
images:
- 7S7nVF8.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Andyfang / Twitter'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

About the nuances of creating a business
----------------------------------------

Stanford University students Tony Xu, Andy Fan, Evan Moore and Stanley Tan in 2012 thought about creating a useful application for small businesses. In the fall of that year, they went to a nearby store and got into a conversation with the salesperson. And then they learned about a big problem: every day a woman received a huge number of orders for food delivery from her store, but there were no those who could deliver them to customers. She had to do all the work herself. Over the next few weeks, they spoke to more than 200 small business representatives. “Together with the co-founders, we interviewed several hundred small restaurant owners in the San Francisco Bay Area. Many said that delivery was a big problem for them,” Fan recalls.

So in 2013, entrepreneurs launched a restaurant food delivery business in Palo Alto, building a simple website in less than an hour. The company was first named Palo Alto Delivery, which was the most common search when people searched for food delivery in Palo Alto. The first site had only the name of the company, a contact phone number, and links to PDF menus of the restaurants. “And an hour after the launch of the site, the first call came. That is, less than two hours passed from the start of creating the site to the first client,” Fan says. He recalls that the first order was Thai shrimp noodles and spring rolls. During the day, the founders of the service studied, and in the evenings they themselves delivered food to customers. So they delivered the first few hundred orders. In June 2013, the company changed its name to DoorDash.

“The four of us started working as couriers, and over time we hired more drivers. In the first month of operation without much advertising, over 150 clients came to us in Palo Alto, and it was amazing. Since then, we have earned more than $10,000,” Fan said a few months after the company was founded.

{{<ads>}}

According to the entrepreneur, one great idea is not enough to create a company. Therefore, one should not think too much about how successful it is and whether the time is right for its implementation. “It is commonly thought that the main thing in creating a successful business is a good idea. And it is she who will open all the doors for you. But it's not. At the very beginning, everyone has to work hard to get off the ground and turn the idea into something special, ”he says. In particular, you need to be prepared for the fact that at first the situation will be uncomfortable, there will be a lot of chaos - whoever can survive this calmly will succeed. To do this, according to the entrepreneur, you need to have a certain worldview.

About the ability to change plans in time
-----------------------------------------

Phan warns that entrepreneurs need to be ready to change their plans while never forgetting their priorities. He gives two examples from his practice that changed his career and business.

The entrepreneur says that in the spring of 2013, when the business was still called Palo Alto Delivery, he faced a difficult choice. Fan originally planned to do an internship at a California IT company next summer. “It was a great opportunity to work with the co-founder of Facebook (now Meta is recognized as an extremist organization whose activities are banned in Russia. — _RBC Pro_) in San Francisco, chat with new people. In addition, they offered a good salary, ”he recalls and adds that he was looking forward to this. However, at the same time, the company applied for participation in the Y Combinator business accelerator program. And one morning, Fan got a call and was told that DoorDash was accepted for this program, and before the end of the day it is necessary to answer whether the company accepts the invitation. “It was a very difficult choice - an internship with a payment of $20,000 and a Y Combinator program with a payment of $3,000 for three months. I chose the second. And the decision I made changed my career,” Fan says.

He believes that entrepreneurs should be willing to take risks and be able to adapt to the situation when necessary. Phan recalls that at some point, the DoorDash site began to crash every week. Despite all attempts to fix it, breakdowns occurred again and again, which affected the attitude of customers to the service. Then Fan decided to freeze all business development for 2.5 months in order to work only on the infrastructure and stable operation of the site. Thus, he preferred reliability to the rapid growth of the business at any cost. “It was a really difficult decision because we had a lot of interesting development ideas that would help us strengthen our position in the market, improve the user experience and accelerate the growth of the business. But at that moment, none of that mattered,” says Fan.

{{<ads>}}

About intuition and honesty
---------------------------

Fan says that it is important to ask people and listen to their opinion, but first of all, you must trust your inner voice. At the very beginning, when the company had only five to ten deliveries a day, he asked his classmates about this project. Everyone answered that this is not a good idea and the world does not need another delivery service. But that didn't stop Fang. He believed in his idea, trusted his instincts, and went on to build the business, which eventually became a very successful, fast-growing company. “Different people, many of whom you respect, will give advice and share their opinions. But the decision is up to you," he said.

Phan recalls that when DoorDash was recruited, he was the CTO. The entrepreneur insisted from day one that the company needed to hire the “best of the best” for the development team. “I was sure that DoorDash needed very good software to be successful,” he said. Fan discussed this idea with experienced investors, and they did not support his idea. “But I decided to listen to my intuition and insisted on building a world-class development team. And that decision has more than paid off,” he says.

According to Fan, openness is important in the team. “I think it's very important to be able to have such open and honest conversations and really understand how each employee contributes to the growth and development of the business,” he notes. To scale a business, you need to eliminate the “bottlenecks” that prevent you from growing as quickly as possible. And so, when discussing strategic decisions, you just need to be honest with yourself and answer the questions: “Where is the bottleneck now that prevents us from growing? In technology? Or in sales? Or something different? Maybe tech support?

{{<ads>}}

Fan emphasizes that it is especially important to build trust with the co-founders and early employees, as they serve as the foundation for the company's culture. “Very often, the first employees become carriers of the culture and an integral part of the company as it grows. And obviously the same goes for the co-founders. Therefore, if you do not develop these relations, then it is unlikely that you will be able to make much progress,” Fan said. He adds that it was initially important that each of the founders of DoorDash had their own areas of interest and knowledge in a particular area. “At the same time, we trusted each other, everyone was sure that the other person on the team knew how to do his job and that he had the best intentions,” he says.
{{<info>}}
Andy Phan is the co-founder of DoorDash, a food delivery service.

Fan was born in 1992. He received a bachelor's degree in computer science from Stanford in 2014. While at university in 2013, he and several other students — Tony Xu, Evan Moore, and Stanley Tan — founded DoorDash.

The company held an IPO in 2020, Fan owns about 4% of the shares of DoorDash. The market value of DoorDash is $22 billion. Revenue in 2021 reached $4.89 billion, which is 1.7 times more than a year ago. The service serves customers in the United States, Canada and Australia. The US market share at the end of 2021 was 57%, and the number of users was 25 million. Fan's personal fortune is estimated at $1.1 billion. He is included in the Forbes ranking of the youngest billionaires in the world.
{{</info>}}

{{<ads>}}

About unusual work and pleasure
-------------------------------

DoorDash launched the WeDash program in 2018, under which absolutely all company employees in the US, Canada and Australia are required to try themselves in an unusual role once a month. For example, developers deliver orders, and couriers go to work in customer support. There are no exceptions for anyone, even for top management. One of its goals is to ensure that employees know the entire workflow of the company from the inside. “This is very important to the DNA of our business. This program is tied to one of our core values ​​- exceptional customer focus,” says Fan. He describes WeDash as a way for employees to understand the company's culture, stay on top of product changes, and provide feedback on how to improve the service. For example, Fan himself tested the possibility of using electric bicycles for delivery with the help of WeDash.

Fan adds that it's important to enjoy what you're doing. “I know it sounds a bit trite, but the early days of a company are going to be a lot of hard times. There will be many doubts, many uncertainties. Just enjoy what's happening. I think it's a very exciting experience and you can learn a lot along the way. Appreciate what you have. And just enjoy the experience of creating something big with other people, and I think it will give you even more pleasant emotions,” Fan says.

_Sources: Andy Fan's TED talk, DoorDash video application for the Y Combinator business accelerator program, Forbes, Financial Times, Foundr and Modern CTO podcasts._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*