---
title: "Be like us: why Coca-Cola changed its name in China to Ke Kou Ke Le"
description: 'When well-known brands in the world go to China, they are literally unrecognizable: Nike, for example, has turned into Nai Ke, and Coca-Cola - into Ke Kou Ke Le. The TexTerra agency (leads the EnterChina project) talks about the features of naming in China'
date: 2022-06-08T15:49:17+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T15:49:17+08:00
images:
- 4NHZccN.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- TexTerra
interest: marketing
channel: 
- strategic marketing
tags: 
---

Foreign companies began to enter China only after the 1978 reforms. New products were greeted with curiosity and distrust: the American and European product was too different from the Chinese and was not at all adapted to the market. In the USSR, in the same period, they even rejoiced at this: the inhabitants were interested in the Western world exactly as it is. I wanted "there" and "that". In China, things are still the opposite: if you want to "here", be prepared to become "like us."

For brands, this is a big problem: not only logistics, but even names have to be adapted to the new market. In the new language, they should sound bright, evoke associations, or at least not contradict common sense. For example, Marvel in China became known as Man Wei (Man - comics, Wei - strength). And LinkedIn (blocked in Russia) has turned into Ling Ying (Ling - lead, Ying - elite). Please note that the new titles

*   indicate the main direction of their activity;
*   cause clear and understandable associations;
*   sound harmonious and vaguely resemble the original names.

Finding a new sound for a brand is not easy, so for inspiration, we have collected examples of eight companies that (not always on the first try) managed to adapt to a new market.

{{<ads>}}

New sound of old brands
-----------------------

**Burger King**

The adaptation of the Burger King brand did not touch the name, but the slogan. In the Chinese version, it consists of four characters, which mean: "I choose my taste."

In English, the Burger King slogan sounds like Taste is king. And in Russia, each advertisement gets its own original slogan.

**L'oreal**

L'Oreal, one of the largest beauty brands in the world, is known in China as "European Finesse". The Chinese version of the name echoes the mood of the word l'aureole, (halo, radiance).

_Beauty and fashion brands in China often use both the original and the Chinese name in their ads: references to the foreign origin of goods help to sell them at a higher price._

**Nike**

The Nike brand in China has evolved into Nai Ke, which means "Invincibility and Resilience." Such a name not only suits the sports brand perfectly, but also conveys its original name in terms of phonetics. And the famous Nike swoosh needs no introduction at all.

**Tide**

Tai Zi is the Chinese name for Taid. The name is not only well adapted in terms of pronunciation, but also carries the necessary meaning: it literally translates as "Get rid of the dirt."

**Lay's**

In China, Lay's chips are called Le Shi, which translates as "Lucky Things". This is more a sound imitation of the original name than a semantic one, but it also sets the consumer in a positive mood.

**Coca Cola**

The Chinese adaptation of the name Coca-Cola can be called one of the most successful: Ke Kou Ke Le means “Delicious fun” in translation. But this was not always the case: when the brand first appeared on the Chinese market, its name could be translated as "Wax-biting tadpoles."

**Reebok**

The sports brand name Reebok has been adapted as Rui Bu, which literally means "Fast Steps". The direction of the translation was set not only by the inability to convey the name literally, but also by the legendary Reebok running shoes.

**Mr. muscle**

When Mr. Muscle just appeared on the Chinese market, there was a curious failure: the word "muscle" in Chinese sounds identical to the Chinese word for "chicken", so "Mr. Chicken" did not receive much popularity among housewives. After some time, the brand received a name that translated as "Mr. Strongman", and things went well.

{{<ads>}}

Looking for a name for China
----------------------------

1.  Use logos. Logos are universal and do not require translation. Always use them in communication and try to make sure that you are recognized even without a name. So does, for example, Louis Vuitton.
2.  Inform buyers. If you decide not to change the name, explain to customers what it means and how to pronounce it - no one wants embarrassment.
3.  Use transliteration if the brand name is the main factor in remembering it. For example, Adidas is 阿迪达斯 ("Adidasi"). Just check the meaning of all the selected hieroglyphs - so that none of them dishonor the brand.
4.  Repeat the content, not the sound, if the meaning of the branding in the company is more important than the visual. For example, Apple in China is called 苹果 ("Pnguo"), that is, "Apple".
5.  Or adapt the entire name to convey both meaning and sound to help build stronger brand associations. For example, a BMW in China is called 宝马 (Baoma), meaning "Dear Horse".

Despite high competition, doing business in China is a promising idea. But when promoting a brand in the local market, you should take into account certain features of naming, which are listed in this article.

*Author:* *TexTerra Agency (leads the EnterChina project, which promotes companies in the Chinese market)*

