---
title: "The head of “1C-Bitrix” Sergey Ryzhikov: “Excess of resources is a mistake”"
description: Why you should not fight for the American market, why hire a psychoanalyst in an IT company, how to delegate tasks and not regret it - in a selection of statements by 1C-Bitrix co-founder Sergey Ryzhikov
date: 2022-05-18T11:43:37+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-18T11:43:37+08:00
images:
- E46qJJG.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Myspeaker'
authors:
- Elizaveta Anokhina
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

About scale
-----------

In the early 1990s, Sergei Ryzhikov was a student studying radiophysics and electronics. Unlike most of his classmates, he had no plans to become an entrepreneur and succeed in trading. “The choice to 'make easy money as a student but fall short in the profession' or 'focus on learning and move into the profession' makes everyone. I was one of the few who at that time chose a job according to their profession, ”he recalls.

After graduating from university, Ryzhikov and his friends started developing websites - the company was called Bitrix. At some point, they realized that if you make a universal content management solution (CMS) and then adapt it for each specific project, it will simplify and speed up the work. And then, in the early 2000s, Ryzhikov had a new idea: to turn the CMS created by Bitrix into a separate product and sell it to the same web development studios that need such software. However, he did not manage to convince business partners immediately.

“At the time, it seemed like everyone was releasing their own CMS. You had to be crazy to take and release your product when there are so many competitors on the market,” says Ryzhikov. However, the products of rivals, according to him, lost a lot - they had neither a fixed price, nor the ability to use it without help from the developer company.

{{<ads>}}

Bitrix took a risk and did not lose. In order to attract as many customers as possible, Ryzhikov began to give orders to web studios that came to his company. There was only one condition - the site had to be made on the CMS "Bitrix: Site Management" (later - "1C-Bitrix: Site Management"). The company, in turn, received a small percentage of the cost of the project. “Everyone was surprised, what is our benefit, and we answered: on a scale!” Ryzhikov explains. Helped and competent marketing. Bitrix advertised its product not only among studios, but also among end customers, thus creating demand. “Clients came to the studios, they answered that they did not work with Bitrix, the clients left. After losing ten clients, the founder wondered: why waste money? And he began to work with us, ”says the entrepreneur. And in 2006, Bitrix integrated the product with 1C, which only spurred demand. In 2007, the companies switched to closer cooperation and registered the 1C-Bitrix joint venture, where 50% belongs to Bitrix, and 50% to 1C.

About three attempts
--------------------

In Russia, "1C-Bitrix: Site Management" quickly became the most popular paid CMS, but in other countries the product did not gain much success. The company twice tried to bring the product abroad and failed twice. According to Ryzhikov, the whole point was that, firstly, then the market had already formed, and secondly, each country had its own requirements for CMS. “The first time we slammed against the wall. The second time we got smarter, put together a good department for the German-speaking market, but nevermind. CMS is a complex business. Each country has its own views on what the site should be, ”recalls Ryzhikov.

But with the Bitrix24 business management service created in 2012, everything worked out right away. The company chose a good moment - demand was just emerging. In addition, this time she had a clear strategy for entering the international market. “We understood where we were going, how we differed from the rest, what our advantage is in product and price issues, why we should be chosen,” explains Ryzhikov. Now Bitrix24 works in 18 languages ​​and brings the company the main revenue - more than 10 million companies are registered in the service.

At the same time, Ryzhikov says that 1C-Bitrix has never considered the American market to be the key one. “A lot of people think that it is the American market that needs to be relied upon. They move, they try to raise investments, they usually raise less than similar American companies, but they still fight for the American market, ”says the entrepreneur. 1C-Bitrix set itself a different task: to become the first in all markets except the American one, and distributed resources accordingly. “The most surprising thing is that our strategy does not rest on the US market, but still leads to the fact that the US is in first place in terms of revenue,” Ryzhikov notes.

{{<ads>}}

About "caviar"
--------------

Ryzhikov says that "if earlier the CEO was just an administrator, today he is a person who changes the company." Twice a year, he necessarily holds two big meetings with the company's management. The team defines key goals for the next six months, and each leader takes three to five big tasks under his responsibility.

And to correct course, to test ideas, an approach called "caviar" - short for "ideal end result" helps. “The bottom line is this: first you need to present the “caviar” as if we are not limited either in money or in any other resources. Then - go to the clients and discuss this result with them. Find out if they need it, is it useful, ”explains Ryzhikov. The feedback received helps to build a development trajectory.

The entrepreneur believes that the company should always work in conditions of scarcity of resources, sometimes it should even be created artificially. “It seems that if everything is in abundance, then the business will trample. I found out from my own experience that an excess of resources is a mistake, and it is necessary to create internal competition so that unnecessary projects are cut off by themselves,” says Ryzhikov. An excess of capital gives the feeling that success can be "buyed", and the team relaxes. A large number of "star" employees leads to conflicts. When there is a lot of time for a project, unnecessary perfectionism appears - Ryzhikov advises setting a hard deadline for yourself and forbidding it to be postponed. He also applies this approach to short planning meetings, the duration of which in 1C-Bitrix never exceeds 30 minutes:

{{<ads>}}
{{<info>}}
Sergey Ryzhikov is a co-founder and CEO of 1C-Bitrix.

Ryzhikov was born in 1972 and spent his childhood in Leningrad and Kaliningrad. He graduated from the Faculty of Radiophysics and Electronics of the Belarusian State University, after which he returned to Kaliningrad. In the same place, in 1996, together with business partners, he founded the Bitrix company, which was engaged in web development. In 2003, the company released a content management system for websites. In 2007, a joint venture was established with 1C - 1C-Bitrix. In 2012, the company released the Bitrix24 business management service.
{{</info>}}

About feeling burned out
------------------------

Ryzhikov admits that for a long time he did not understand how to properly delegate tasks. He says that at first he simply gave the task to one of his subordinates and “forgot” about it. As a result, everything necessarily did not go according to plan, the task had to be “returned” and urgently saved the situation, and parted with the employee. “After some time, I realized that my task as an entrepreneur is to start the process, but when I give it away, I need to come up with metrics to understand that everything is going well inside. The manager will not come up with them himself, so we sit down together and formulate them, ”says Ryzhikov. Then he and the manager regularly check against the selected metrics and charts. As a result, everyone is aware of what is happening and understands what is good and what needs to be corrected or improved.

Another problem that Ryzhikov had a hard time dealing with was identifying himself with the company. Due to the fact that he could not "separate" himself from the company, the entrepreneur was very sensitive to any criticism and felt exhausted. “I could not relax, it seemed to me that if I was distracted, everything would collapse without me. At first it was very cool - it allowed me to be in good shape. But then came the feeling of burnout,” he says. According to Ryzhikov, a psychoanalyst helped him cope with the situation. “I had to accept that I am not omnipotent and that I need to separate myself from the company. I run this company, but the ship has an engine, a crew, a lot of processes that I cannot constantly control. If I didn't, I would have destroyed myself."

{{<ads>}}

About psychoanalysis
--------------------

At the initiative of Ryzhikov, a psychoanalyst also appeared on the staff of 1C-Bitrix. He believes that "it is impossible to motivate an employee who has a lot of pain inside." “If a person has a bad relationship with children, he doesn’t have a headache about work. But this does not mean that he does not need to be given a chance or help to cope with problems, ”adds Ryzhikov.

At first, he suggested that top managers go for a consultation with a psychoanalyst. “In order to avoid misunderstandings, I gave an introductory lecture, explained why and why this project is important, what benefits it can bring to each employee, how much awareness and personal growth can be “pumped,” says the entrepreneur. Then middle managers were “connected” to the initiative, and then ordinary employees. As a result, the services of a psychoanalyst have become so popular that it takes three weeks to sign up. Ryzhikov emphasizes that he does not discuss any personnel issues with the psychoanalyst, as this is a gross violation of ethics. “We are doing this so that employees will direct resources to self-realization, and not to fight windmills. The presence of any business goals or KPIs here is unacceptable to me.”

_Sources: Forbes, VC.ru, Inc. Russia, RB.ru._

**Author:** *Elizaveta Anokhina*