---
title: "The future of the US market depends on Apple shares. Why and what lies ahead"
description: Recently, one of the locomotives of the US market has lost the status of the most valuable company. A further fall in Apple shares could drag the entire S&P 500 index with it. Experts, although they are lowering their targets for securities, still predict growth relative to current values.
date: 2022-06-08T13:27:13+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T13:27:13+08:00
images:
- fDdl5s6.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- 
interest: investments
channel: 
- shares
- forecast
tags: 
---

The American market may go into a bearish phase in the near future. Such a risk is quite real due to a number of factors - both inside and outside the United States. The Fed raises the key rate and reduces economic stimulus, and in China there are new lockdowns and suspension of production due to outbreaks of COVID-19.

A bear market is said to occur when stock markets lose more than 20% of their previous peaks. The all-time high for the S&P 500 on January 4 was 4818.62. On May 12, as of 21:10 Moscow time, the value of the exchange indicator was 3870.04 points (a decrease of 19.68%). This leaves the S&P 500 with only a few points left to lose (to 3855), but that may not happen if Apple shares hold up better than the broad market.

Apple is one of the largest companies by capitalization. Its shares are included in all major indices, including the Dow Jones, NASDAQ, and S&P 500. Due to these factors, the value of the company's securities greatly affects the state of the entire US market.

In particular, the market capitalization of Apple [is](https://www.barrons.com/articles/sp500-bear-market-apple-51652120401?tesla=y) just over 7% of the total market capitalization of the S&P 500. At the same time, the level of the index is weighted by the market capitalization of the companies included in it. Thus, the higher the market value of securities, the greater their influence on the movement of the index.

As long as Apple shares are holding above $150, experts [say the S&P 500 has a good chance of staying above the bear market margin.](https://www.barrons.com/articles/sp500-bear-market-apple-51652120401?tesla=y) However, on May 11, the price of Apple's papers crossed the $150 border - trading ended at $146, and the company lost the title of the most expensive in the world, losing it to Saudi Aramco. On May 12, the paper fell even lower - to $140. Now the corporation, probably, not only will not help the S&P 500 hold out, but it is also capable of accelerating the fall into the bear market zone.

{{<ads>}}

## High key rate is bad news for Apple

The higher cost of credit deprives consumers of the incentive to buy more goods and services. In addition, a general slowdown in the economy will also lead to lower incomes, which will cause consumers to refuse to buy new devices or postpone it. Thus, Apple could be hurt by declining units sold and average prices, while supply chain issues are unlikely to be resolved.

Apple has lost billions of dollars due to supply chain problems, and this is not the limit

The global chip shortage continues to affect Apple's supply. The problem arose due to increased demand for technology and disruptions in production during the pandemic. It's not the processors that are the worst off, but the more commonly used chips, such as display drivers and power management systems. These relatively low-tech chips are used in a huge number of devices, including those from Apple.

One of Apple's suppliers, Foxconn, has already [warned](https://www.reuters.com/technology/apple-supplier-foxconns-q1-profit-up-5-line-with-market-view-2022-05-12/) that e-business revenue, including smartphones, could decline in the current quarter. Among the reasons for the slowdown in revenue growth, Apple's Chinese partner cited rising inflation, cooling demand and worsening problems with supply chains.

Another problem is new outbreaks of coronavirus in China and a harsh response from the authorities. Closing factories due to lockdowns leads to additional problems. So, Apple [tried to](https://9to5mac.com/2022/05/03/apple-asked-foxconn-to-recruit-iphone-workers-early/) get ahead of the introduction of quarantines due to the coronavirus by asking Foxconn to hire workers to assemble the iPhone 14 earlier than usual, but this plan had to be abandoned almost immediately when the city closed.

Apple CFO Luca Maestri said supply constraints due to disruptions related to the coronavirus and the industry's chip shortage will affect the company's ability to meet demand [.](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/04/28/apple-aapl-earnings-q2-2022.html) Management expects losses to be between $4 billion and $8 billion, significantly more than in the first three months of the year.

"If the problems Apple is facing have deeper roots, inventory shortages could end up leading to spending indecision, which will detract from the positive momentum we're seeing in terms of demand," [said](https://www.barrons.com/articles/apple-amazon-stock-tech-losing-streaks-51652112126?mod=Searchresults) Benjamin Black, an analyst at Deutsche Bank.

“China and supply chain issues should be of greatest concern in the second quarter of the calendar year and then subside after the launch of the new iPhone 14,” [said](https://seekingalpha.com/news/3829283-apple-falls-as-wall-street-digests-june-quarter-hit-analysts-note-demand-is-teflon-like) Dan Ives, an analyst at Wedbush Securities.

{{<ads>}}

## Apple products are still out of competition, and this outweighs all the negativity

Citi Research analyst Jim Suva recommends buying stocks with a target price of $200. At the same time, his view of Apple's logistical problems runs counter to the opinion of other experts: in fact, this is good, because the demand for the company's products is much higher than the supply, and the user base of the ecosystem continues to grow.

“For those who argue that demand is declining, we point to long lead times for products and the absence of a compelling competitive alternative. At the same time, Apple's growing customer base will lead to future revenues from numerous services that are much more profitable than the devices themselves, ” Suva [emphasizes .](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/why-apples-supply-crunch-might-not-be-that-bad-11651243437)

The latest financials have proven that Apple can deliver continued growth even with an outstanding 2021 performance. Demand for the iPhone remains strong as more people move to 5G technology, and consumers love the iPhone 13. The Mac is also incredibly popular because of the M1 chip family. Thanks to the innovation, Apple stood out from competitors in the computer segment, which experienced declining shipments.

At the same time, the more marginal segment of the App Store is also growing. App Store net revenue growth accelerated to 8% year-on-year in April from 6% in March, according to Morgan Stanley [analyst](https://thefly.com/landingPageNews.php?id=3505260&headline=AAPL-Apples-App-Store-revenue-growth-accelerated-in-April-says-Morgan-Stanley) Cathy Huberty and according to Sensor Tower. Although this acceleration is somewhat weaker than the analyst expected, she sees signs of growth in major markets and additional opportunities as competition weakens. Huberty expects the App Store to reach 15% year-on-year growth in June.

Third quarter results are likely to be less bright due to problems in the supply chain. However, Bank of America analyst Vamsi Mohan [says](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/05/wall-street-likes-these-defensive-stocks-especially-during-a-sell-off.html) that the corporation has continued to increase profits during the past two recessions and this has been due to new products, unlike other technology companies. In this regard, Apple's paper can even be called protective.

{{<ads>}}

## Opinion of analysts on Apple shares

*   Morgan Stanley analyst Cathy Huberty [lowered](https://thefly.com/n.php?id=3503110) her target price for Apple shares from $210 to $195 and maintained her "outperform" rating. Although the expert lowered its June quarter revenue forecast by 3% based on the company's comments, this decision is the result of supply restrictions caused by the coronavirus, and not a decrease in demand. For Huberty, Apple remains the top pick for 2022.
*   Baird analyst William Power [lowered](https://thefly.com/n.php?id=3503172) Apple's price target from $190 to $185 and maintained the stock's "outperform" rating. According to the expert, he will buy securities in case of any decline. Power believes that demand has generally remained stable, and he remains positive about Apple's long-term competitiveness and strong cash flow.
*   Evercore ISI analyst Amit Daryanani [said](https://thefly.com/n.php?id=3503384) revenue and earnings growth over the last quarter was impressive, driven by positive performance in all categories except iPad. Although the company's problems will lead to lower revenues in the current quarter, Daryanani expects some of these revenues to return in the future - through the satisfaction of pent-up demand. According to the analyst, Apple is well positioned to maintain sales growth of 4-6% and earnings-per-share growth of 10-13% for several years. The EA retains its "outperform" rating and a target price of $210.
*   HSBC experts [are concerned about](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/10/tuesdays-top-wall-street-calls-apple-tesla-gm-palantir-robinhood.html?&qsearchterm=apple) regulatory hurdles for Apple in the near future. “Apple has created and continues to develop a very efficient and profitable ecosystem based on the seamless integration of hardware and services. This may be technologically efficient, but leaves regulators, especially in Europe, worried about the market position of a company like Apple,” the analysts wrote.
*   Rosenblatt analyst Barton Crockett [lowered](https://thefly.com/n.php?id=3504270) Apple's price target from $184 to $168 and remains neutral. The expert called the company's report for the last quarter constructive, but lubricated due to the prospect of major supply disruptions in the current quarter. At the same time, he does not know when China will cease to be a threat to Apple in terms of introducing quarantines. Crockett also noted that Alphabet said in a financial report that Google Play's revenue has fallen due to commission cuts: a similar decline could occur in Apple's App Store.

**Author:** *Valeria Dubkovskaya*