---
title: "Stress: 2 ways to measure it and 7 to reduce its negative impact"
description: "Stress is a paradoxical reaction of the body: depending on the intensity and duration of exposure, it can be a defense, or it can be harmful. Elena Klekovkina (Skolkovo School of Management) talks about the pros and cons of being under stress"
date: 2022-06-15T00:33:03+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-15T00:33:03+08:00
images:
- mpVhmJH.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Elena Klekovkina
interest: Health
channel: 
- mindfulness
tags: 
---

For a leader, a stressful situation is, in a sense, a gift. If the team is in the comfort zone, then no changes will be implemented. And if employees feel the risks of losing their jobs and lowering salaries, then the team is mobilized. But it is important to understand how intense the impact of stress is in order to prevent burnout and chronic stress in employees.

Measuring stress levels
-----------------------

Stress is normal if it causes a desire to quickly reorganize, make the right decisions and satisfy the needs that we have realized as unmet. Stress is excessive if it becomes too intense and prolonged, if we do not find a way out of situations that do not satisfy us.

**The first way** to measure your stress level is to take the Holmes-Ray Social Adjustment Test. This is a list of 50 stressful situations, each of which is rated on a scale from 1 to 100 points. A person needs to find situations that he has encountered during the year, sum up the points and understand whether the stress is over the top or moderate. Thus, the death of one of the spouses is estimated at the maximum 100 points, divorce - at 73 points. The list also includes positive events that cause stress, such as marriage, which is estimated by scientists at 50 points.

**The second way**  is to track your emotional reaction to stress (joy, anger, surprise, fear, denial and contempt) and rate its intensity on a scale of 1 to 10. It is also important to just listen to yourself and understand how we feel. And if it turns out that there is no joy in life, then it's time to change something.

{{<ads>}}

Evaluating emotions is not so easy, because a person usually focuses on thoughts, it is difficult for him to realize his emotions. **An interesting approach is to keep an emotional diary** for one to two weeks . Sit down in the morning or evening and remember:

*   what caused the stress?
*   what emotions did you feel?
*   what base value was affected?
*   How did I react and how do I want to react next time?

Most likely, the diary of emotions will show that stress is caused by the same trigger. After all, stress signals that some need is not satisfied, some value is affected. Knowing this, you can decide how to change the situation.

**Lack of stress**  is also a risk. Stress is energy, a stimulus for change. And if its level is insufficient to cause a desire to move on, then it's time to change something in life. For example, if a person, waking up in the morning, does not want to go to the office and do the work that he used to do with interest and enthusiasm. However, most often we talk about the excess stress in our lives and ways to cope with it.

Stress management
-----------------

The first step in managing stress is understanding your personal characteristics, since stress resistance depends on temperament. Someone from birth is emotionally thick-skinned and can experience great stress, is not afraid of competition and risks. Some people are very sensitive. Such people subtly experience the emotions of their own and those around them, but they have an extremely vulnerable nervous system.

Social factors, such as position in society and relationships with other people, can provoke and exacerbate stress. Many faced the fear of being outside of society during the pandemic: companies went remote, and people began to experience forms of near-depressive states due to lack of communication. One of the most common fears is the fear of rejection. By the way, the fear of public speaking is connected precisely with him. Colossal stress arises in a person who has nothing to feed his family, and in a very wealthy person who has something to lose.

Often we experience stress and anxiety about things that we have no control over. A simple example: we get very annoyed when we get stuck in a traffic jam. But if you analyze this reaction, it turns out that it is not the traffic jam itself that irritates, but the fact of being late for the meeting. Realizing this, reducing stress becomes simple: just call colleagues and warn about the delay.

{{<ads>}}

Managers, especially in a crisis situation, strive to get as much relevant information and news as possible. But sometimes the desire to be in the know goes beyond the norm and becomes a kind of self-destructive behavior. One strategy that helps **reduce stress levels** in this case is to build on facts that have already happened and rely less on predictions, which are just an imaginary realm.

We cannot and should not exclude stress from our lives, as it stimulates development and helps to cope with difficult situations. But we can react correctly and adjust our reactions.

Waves of stress
---------------

**Short Wave** . Lasts a few seconds. There is a quick reaction that we cannot control, but we can learn to catch it and give ourselves time to understand the situation. There is a rule of 5 seconds - to pause before reacting in order to better understand your emotions. Or do 10 squats to deal with aggression and anger.

**Medium wave** . Lasts 2-6 hours. At this time, we make some important operational decisions, resolve the situation.

**Long Wave** . Lasts 2-6 weeks or longer. We make decisions that lead to systemic changes. For example, an entrepreneur - about transferring a business to another country, an employee - about dismissal or transfer to another position. Moreover, the more we delay the adoption of such decisions, the higher the risk of increased, and eventually chronic stress.

Causes of Chronic Stress
------------------------

**Situation of extreme uncertainty** . Chronic stress occurs if the uncertainty goes off scale and a person cannot find a foothold. Now the situation in this regard is critical: if earlier we talked about the VUCA world (volatility, uncertainty, complexity, ambiguity - “instability”, “uncertainty”, “complexity” and “ambiguity”), today we are talking about the BANI world (Brittle, Anxious, Nonlinear, Incomprehensible - “fragile”, “disturbing”, “nonlinear”, “incomprehensible”), where there are very few points of support. To reduce the risks of chronic stress, you need to find footholds in alternative strategies, partnerships and areas of activity.

**Imposter Syndrome** . 80% of executives experience impostor syndrome periodically. We all experience it when we enter a new organization and an unfamiliar industry, when we take on a new function for ourselves, when we are faced with a difficult task.

{{<ads>}}

Most of us hide the fact that we lack the necessary competencies. Whereas the best strategy is to show vulnerability, because vulnerability causes trust, and ideality causes rejection.

**Burnout** . A person who came to work just to work cannot burn out. Burnout occurs with a special attitude to work, when for some reason motivation decreases. If you do not understand the problem, chronic stress can occur. For example, it may be that a person has become bored in his function. Then a good way to deal with burnout is to move to another department, a new project, or expanding tasks. If a person is dissatisfied with the conditions of remuneration, it is necessary to negotiate with the employer.

Ways to increase stress resistance
----------------------------------

1.  **Sufficient sleep** . The minimum required for a person is 8 hours. People who sleep five hours and feel great are borrowing energy from the future. At some point in the downtime, irreversible physiological problems will set in.
2.  **Proper nutrition** . The best diet is Mediterranean cuisine. As many seafood, greens, salads and fruits as possible.
3.  **Moderate physical activity** . It is better to do exercises for 15–30 minutes every day than to go to the gym once a week and load yourself to the fullest. During work, you need to take small breaks every 90 minutes, ideally - walk down the street. Another way to recover is daytime sleep. It is enough to take a nap for 20 minutes, sleep does not have to be deep.
4.  **Inspiration** . It is important to engage in a hobby - a business that fills you with energy. It is different for everyone: someone likes to read books alone, and someone can recharge from going to a noisy party with friends.
5.  **Social support** . It works both ways: there are people to whom we give support and feel satisfaction from this, and there are people who give support to us, they are our fulcrum.
6.  **Basic breathing exercises** . Sit on a chair with a straight back and take 10 deep belly breaths. When we are stressed, we breathe shallowly, and deep breathing promotes the production of acetylcholine, which induces relaxation.
7.  **Meditation** . Calms the mind. By observing our thoughts during meditation, we can distinguish between imaginary and real fears, learn to manage our emotions, feelings, thoughts and avoid unnecessary stress.

**Author:** *Elena Klekovkina*, Director of the Center for Executive Coaching, Development and Career, Skolkovo School of Management