---
title: "How to get the most vitamins from food - advice from a nutritionist"
description: "Many people think that supermarket products do not contain enough vitamins, and they buy dietary supplements to make up for the “deficiency”. But you can get all the necessary nutrients from food. What should be the diet, explains nutritionist Performance Food Anton Berdov"
date: 2022-06-15T00:45:54+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-15T00:45:54+08:00
images:
- AjhRpIw.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Unsplash'
authors:
- Anton Berdov
interest: Health
channel: 
- nutrition
- instructions
tags: 
---

By nature, we are arranged in such a way as to get everything the body needs from food. For the last 50 years, people have been almost independent of the harvest in the garden and eat as varied as ever. Thanks to this, theoretically, we can get with food what, due to geography and complex logistics, we have always been deprived of. On the other hand, employees of industrial food production hardly care about the content of vitamins, minerals and amino acids in food, their task is to deliver products to the counter in the best possible way by any means. Hence all the preservatives and food additives.

So is it possible to get all the necessary nutrients with food today? Yes, but for this you will probably need to reconsider your diet.

Three rules of healthy eating
-----------------------------

### 1\. Food should be varied

If you eat only boiled potatoes and pasta, vitamin deficiency is guaranteed to come in three months. This is, of course, extreme. Another excess - in an effort to maintain health to buy exotic fruits and some goji berries. But useful substances are found in different products and in a variety of proportions and combinations. Therefore, the main advice that any nutritionist will give you is simple - food should be varied. This ensures that you get a wide range of nutrients.

### 2\. Balanced diet

If you eat an apple, a banana, a bunch of greens, a carrot, a spoonful of honey during the day and drink it all with celery juice, then your food will be varied and even quite healthy, but completely unbalanced in terms of the amount of proteins, fats and carbohydrates. Roughly speaking, a balanced diet is a lot of bright seasonal fruits and vegetables and fish, as well as a small share of dairy products, cereals and quality meat. Most people get enough vitamins with such a diet. But we live in a northern country where there is little light and heat. As a result, there is a lack of quality vegetables and fruits. This is a problem, but below is the solution.

{{<ads>}}

### 3\. Food calorie is important

Overeating is just as bad as undereating. However, the calories you get should not be empty. Sugar or fast food are typical examples of empty calories. There is taste, calories, which means energy too, but there is no benefit. An average man with moderate physical activity needs about 2.5 thousand kcal of a varied and balanced meal daily, and a woman needs 2 thousand kcal, respectively. Many of us almost double these norms, and then are surprised by the extra pounds.

What does a balanced diet look like based on these inputs? In Russia, the most popular dish for breakfast is porridge or an egg dish, to which I would add whole grain bread, as well as fresh vegetables. Lunch may include a vegetable salad, a hot dish with a side dish, and seasonal fruit for dessert. Dinner, by analogy with lunch, consists of hot dishes with a side dish, but the type of hot food should be different - for example, if there was chicken for lunch, then fish is recommended for dinner. Snacks and afternoon snacks can be completely different, ranging from yogurt to a handful of nuts. Note that in such a diet there is no fast food, kilograms of sweets and alcohol.

Vitamins
--------

Now that we know that we need to monitor the daily calorie intake, the balance of proteins, fats and carbohydrates and the variety of food, it's time to move on to vitamins. There are 13 types of vitamins, which are divided into two solubility groups.

*   **Fat-soluble vitamins** (eg A, D, E) are found in animal products. They can accumulate in the body, which can sometimes lead to an overabundance.
*   **Water-soluble vitamins** (B vitamins and vitamin C) are found in plant foods.

All of these vitamins can be obtained from food. However, the main focus should be on B vitamins, vitamin D and carotenoids - the most scarce in Russia, according to a study by the Federal Research Center for Nutrition and Biotechnology of Russia.

### What vitamins are easy to get?

Vitamins of group B, as well as vitamin C, are found in large quantities in seasonal vegetables and fruits. Yes, many of them are not as beautiful as imported ones. But, firstly, they are familiar to the body, and secondly, vegetables and fruits quickly lose vitamins and microelements during transportation and storage. For example, vitamin C levels in citrus fruits are at their highest levels at the time of picking and begin to decline as early as the seventh day. It can take more than a month from picking to buying in the store, so it's hard to tell if they have any vitamin C left in them. An alternative to an orange that ripens from November to March is berries from June to August and apples from September to October. And strawberries from the garden are much healthier than those brought from Africa in winter.

{{<ads>}}

### Which vitamins are harder to get?

Russia is not California, because of the lack of sun, every second inhabitant has a vitamin D deficiency. Therefore, doctors recommend adding it to your diet in the form of drops. If we take as a basis three vitamins that are deficient in our country (D, B12 and B9), we get the following picture.

*   **Vitamin D.** Its daily intake is 600 mcg, which is equivalent to 300 ml of fish oil or 11 kg of porcini mushrooms. It is unlikely that a person will be able to eat so much, so it is recommended to use supplements.
*   **Vitamin B12** . The daily norm is 2.4 mcg. The main source of the vitamin is seafood: octopus, mussels, mackerel, as well as red fish, such as chum salmon. Even 100 g per day of any of the above products is enough to meet the required norm.
*   **Vitamin B9**  - in total, about 400 mcg of the vitamin is needed per day, it is present in excess in plant foods. For example, 100 g of dry chickpeas contains 140% of the daily requirement of vitamin B9.

### What can you eat every day?

Separately, it is worth noting products in which there are so many vitamins and minerals that it is difficult to single out one thing. These are avocados, Brussels sprouts, mushrooms, chicken eggs, salmon, nuts and legumes, and strawberries. You can eat them at least every day - I have never seen a person who would overdose on Brussels sprouts.

Few more tips
-------------------

### 1\. Don't Peel

Vegetables and fruits are best eaten whole, and not in the form of juices or purees. The reason is that many vitamins, as well as special forms of fiber that are not found in the pulp, are found in the peel. For example, the skin of an apple [contains](https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/peeling-fruits-veggies#TOC_TITLE_HDR_4) 332% more vitamin K, 142% more vitamin A, 115% more vitamin C, and 20% more calcium than the pulp. In addition, the peel contains antioxidants that help reduce the risk of cardiovascular and other diseases. For the same reason, it is better to eat whole grains: the outer shell of the grain contains more nutrients than its core.

{{<ads>}}

### 2\. Alcohol is the main enemy of vitamins

When drinking any amount of alcoholic beverages ,  poisoning [occurs .](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3544907/#:~:text=Abstract,mechanisms%20may%20also%20be%20involved.) During this period, all the forces of the body are aimed at recovery and it consumes a huge amount of vitamins, primarily group B, which are responsible for digestion and the breakdown of ethanol molecules. As a result, a person does not get enough nutrients or cannot use them as they should, which in severe cases can cause malnutrition. Therefore, it is better to completely refuse or minimize alcohol consumption.

### 3\. Drink more water

The human body is 60% water, and the loss of even 1% can lead to an imbalance of vitamins and minerals, and if more than 15% of water is lost, it is fraught with death. Although water has no energy value, it is necessary to dissolve vitamins such as vitamin C, B vitamins, biotin and pantothenic acid. A healthy person needs 28–35 ml of clean drinking water per 1 kg of weight per day.

**Author:** *Anton Berdov, Leading Nutritionist of Performance Food Holding, Master in Dietetics (University of Surrey, UK)*