---
title: "Why investors are fleeing crypto: two reasons and one conspiracy theory"
description: Explaining in simple terms why investors are selling cryptocurrencies
date: 2022-05-15T02:16:54+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-15T02:16:54+08:00
images:
- GIt1y3u.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- Valeria Dubkovskaya
interest: Investments
channel: 
- crypto
tags: 
---

On Thursday, the cryptocurrency markets experienced a global downturn. First, the TerraUSD stablecoin broke its peg to the dollar. Then Bitcoin and Ethereum, the two most important cryptocurrencies in the market, also fell to local lows. Specifically, Bitcoin is down 20% since the start of the week and almost 60% from its all-time high of $69,000 in November 2021.

On Friday, the situation improved slightly, but still remains not as rosy as it was before. It seems that many investors have become disillusioned with the tool. According [to](https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/) CoinMarketCap, the entire cryptocurrency market is now worth $1.2 trillion, less than half of the $2.9 trillion it was worth in November. In 24 hours, about $200 billion worth of crypto assets simply [evaporated](https://www.wsj.com/articles/warnings-from-the-crypto-currency-crash-stablecoin-liquidity-terrausd-11652390321).

In the past, a drop in the price of a cryptocurrency was often called a buying opportunity, which again led to an increase. Now, with the threat of a recession as high as ever, it is unclear whether investors will buy this fall.

{{<ads>}}

## The fall of the stablecoin led to a panic in the market

As the name implies, a stablecoin is a digital currency pegged to some stable asset, such as the US dollar or gold. Stablecoins are supposed to be less volatile than bitcoin and other coins. An altcoin is any cryptocurrency launched after bitcoin.

There are two types of stablecoins on the market right now. The first type is theoretically fully backed by "hard" assets such as dollar debentures and cash. Thus, one digital coin can be redeemed at any time for $1, which protects investors from volatility. This type includes the Tether coin.

The second type, which TerraUSD (UST) belongs to, is algorithmic stablecoins. Technically, these coins are also worth $1. However, they are not backed by any "hard" assets and instead use financial engineering and blockchain to maintain the course.

The value of stablecoins has grown rapidly over the past year, [surpassing](https://techcrunch.com/2022/04/26/stablecoins-are-here-to-stay-but-will-they-see-wider-adoption/) $180 billion in March.

The collapse of the Terra project came unexpectedly. Just last week, the coin [entered](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/05/luna-foundation-guard-bolsters-stablecoin-reserve-by-raising-1point5-billion-in-bitcoin.html) the top 10 cryptocurrencies by market capitalization. On Wednesday, it lost about 75% of its value at the moment. On Friday, UST was already trading at around $0.14. As a result, Luna, a token closely related to UST that fluctuates in price with demand, is now worth $0.

Despite the fact that the situation scared many investors, some experts were not surprised by what happened. According [to](https://edition.cnn.com/2022/05/12/investing/luna-terra-stablecoin-explained/index.html) Charles Cascarilla, CEO and co-founder of blockchain infrastructure company Paxos, algorithmic coins are just a fancy way of saying something is worth a dollar because it is backed by another asset that we also create out of thin air. In the case of TerraUSD, that other “out of thin air” asset was the Luna cryptocurrency.

{{<ads>}}

{{<info>}}
**How the scheme worked with Terra**

Theoretically, an investor can exchange one Terra coin, whose rate is pegged to the dollar, for one Luna token, the price of which is not fixed.

Traders participating in a process called arbitrage make trades on the price difference between the underlying asset and the derivative instrument. Thus, they can quickly make a profit using the fluctuations of any asset. It is they who create an incentive to maintain a stable cost of Terra at the level of $1.

For example, if Terra falls below $1, arbitrage traders start buying UST cheaply and trading it for Luna, which remains at $1.

Ultimately, the whole system rests on the fact that traders will exchange Luna and Terra in order to keep the cost of Terra at $1.
{{</info>}}

The problem is that the entire Luna and Terra ecosystem relies on traders who believe that Luna has value. As soon as investors lose faith in the system, all bets are reset. According to one version, this is exactly what happened this week.

“This is exactly the death spiral that many people predicted,” [says](https://edition.cnn.com/2022/05/12/investing/luna-terra-stablecoin-explained/index.html) Henry Elder, head of decentralized assets at investment firm Wave Financial.

“Many stablecoins have been launched with the same type of dollar peg mechanism. Now that this model has proven ineffective, i.e. failed to stop the collapse in value, the future of other algorithmic stablecoins is very uncertain,” [said](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/12/what-this-weeks-terra-stablecoin-fiasco-means-for-crypto-and-what-investors-can-learn-from-it.html) Clara Medali, head of research at data provider Kaiko.

Moreover, the fall of Terra may affect bitcoin. The Luna Foundation Guard — the foundation of Terra creator Do Kwon — has amassed a multi-billion dollar amount of bitcoin to help support UST. Luna Foundation Guard can now sell most of these bitcoin assets to support the stablecoin.

{{<ads>}}

“I think that young investors, whose first investment experience was related to cryptocurrencies, are really scared by what is happening now. They react in more panic than more experienced investors,” [said](https://www.politico.com/news/2022/05/13/crypto-braces-for-washington-scrutiny-amid-meltdown-00032162) Theunis Brosen, chief digital finance and regulatory economist at ING.

Indeed, the situation greatly frightened investors. The largest stablecoin by market value, Tether, also fell, but only to $0.96, and then recovered to $0.993. Hedge funds [are betting](https://www.wsj.com/articles/bitcoin-falls-to-26-000-as-crypto-selloff-intensifies-11652340653) that Tether could break away from the $1 level again in the coming days.

The security of this coin also raises questions. The company disclosed the structure of the reserves only after the court decision. [It turned out](https://bpi.com/stablecoins-are-backed-by-reserves-give-us-a-break/) that 28% of Tether's collateral was US government bonds, another 10% was currency and deposits. However, the rest of the collateral was mostly corporate debt, which carries high risks.

Tether's fall could prove to be even more devastating than Terra's. [70% of bitcoin volumes are traded](https://newmoneyreview.com/index.php/2021/10/11/tether-dominates-bitcoin-trading/) through Tether , and daily volumes of Tether transactions often exceed those of bitcoin. Cryptocurrency prices are often quoted in Tether, which can be purchased on most major exchanges. If Tether somehow collapses or faces major regulatory action, market liquidity on crypto exchanges will likely dry up and many could lose fortunes.

However, additional versions of the reasons for the fall of the stablecoin Terra have already appeared on social networks. Many believe that it was the deals of large American hedge funds and investment companies that caused this "death spiral". BlackRock and Citadel Securities have already [issued](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-11/citadel-securities-says-not-involved-in-terra-stablecoin-crash) statements denying any involvement in the collapse of Terra.

{{<ads>}}

## Cryptocurrencies are falling for the same reasons as rising stocks

Anti-cryptocurrencies have long said that decentralized digital currencies were only growing thanks to low interest rates and stimulus payments during the coronavirus.

For example, JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon, a well-known cryptocurrency critic, has previously [stated](https://nypost.com/2021/10/11/jpmorgan-chief-jamie-dimon-says-bitcoin-is-worthless/) that bitcoin is worth nothing. One of the leaders of Berkshire Hathaway, billionaire Charlie Munger, recently [called](https://nypost.com/2022/02/17/berkshire-hathaways-munger-crypto-like-a-venereal-disease/) cryptocurrencies a venereal disease and said that he was proud that he was able to avoid it. Perhaps his position makes sense, because over the past six months, Berkshire Hathaway shares have risen by 5.6%, while bitcoin has fallen by almost 60%.

It seems that many investors have begun to treat cryptocurrencies the same way they treat growth stocks. Reducing the stimulus program, rising interest rates and a growing number of global economic problems could lead to a recession and a reduction in household incomes. In addition, thanks to the increase in Fed rates, the yield of more reliable instruments, in particular, bonds, is growing. Against this background, investors are trying to choose less risky assets and refuse to invest in technology companies and cryptocurrencies.

Indeed, the decline in the value of cryptocurrencies began when the US Federal Reserve raised interest rates in an attempt to slow the growth of inflation, at the same time sending the dynamics of technology stocks into a tailspin. The NASDAQ Composite is down 30% since the start of the year and has been highly correlated with the price of bitcoin in recent weeks. “There has been some convergence between Wall Street stocks and cryptocurrencies,” [said](https://nypost.com/2022/05/12/crypto-investors-panic-amid-digital-coin-bitcoin-crash/) Garrick Heeleman, head of research at Blockchain.com and visiting fellow at the London School of Economics.

“People are used to thinking that cryptocurrencies will not be subject to the traditional fluctuations of the financial market. Recent trends show that they are still closely intertwined,” [explains](https://qz.com/2116509/crypto-isnt-a-safe-haven-during-high-inflation/) Itai Goldstein, professor of finance and economics at the Wharton Business School at the University of Pennsylvania. “The crypto sell-off is now part of a wider sell-off in high-risk assets, which can be explained by new signals from the Fed to raise rates to fight inflation.”

{{<ads>}}

Previously, cryptocurrencies were called protective assets that can save you from inflation. However, blockchain expert and Rutgers business school professor Merav Ozair [believes](https://qz.com/2116509/crypto-isnt-a-safe-haven-during-high-inflation/) that era is long gone. “There was a time when you could talk about bitcoin as a way to diversify market risks, but this is no longer the case. When people panic, they panic outside of a single asset,” the expert said.

What will happen to cryptocurrencies after the fall

A sharper decline in stablecoins and other coins may lead to forced sales for those investors who bought them with leverage, and this will lead to an avalanche fall of the entire market.

Canadian fintech specialist Ryan Clements is convinced that the value of many coins will drop to zero. The expert also fears that some examples of cryptocurrencies will turn out to be simple scams. “I think now is the right time for the market to figure out what the true utility of blockchain is. Other than just a cryptocurrency for speculative trading, ” Clements [said.](https://edition.cnn.com/2022/05/12/investing/luna-terra-stablecoin-explained/index.html)

According to Bitcoin IRA's Chris Kline, a drop in bitcoin will likely scare away some retail investors who invested in the cryptocurrency during its stimulus-driven explosion and potentially attract those looking to buy back on the decline. “There are people who will say, you know what, cryptocurrencies are just not for me. But there will likely be just as many new people entering the market, ” Kline [said .](https://nypost.com/12.05.2022/crypto-investors-panic-amid-digital-coin-bitcoin-crash/)

{{<ads>}}

Crypto evangelists tend to view crashes like the collapse of Terra as an unfortunate loss, but also see it as a way to build trust in blockchain technology. “I really think that the process of selecting good ideas and bad ideas ultimately makes the whole ecosystem stronger. The economy is moving to the speed of the internet, but the financial system is still running at the speed of the post office. Unfortunately, there are moments of creative destruction that actually turn out to be some of the best ways to remove what people really need to get rid of,” [says](https://edition.cnn.com/2022/05/12/investing/luna-terra-stablecoin-explained/index.html) Charles Cascarilla, CEO and co-founder of blockchain infrastructure company Paxos.

Critics of cryptocurrencies see this fall as an excuse for increased regulation. “The instability of TerraUSD is another reason why we need to carefully regulate stablecoins and other cryptocurrencies. These products are much more complex than they seem to consumers, they put American incomes at risk and can affect the rest of the economy,” [said](https://www.politico.com/news/2022/05/13/crypto-braces-for-washington-scrutiny-amid-meltdown-00032162) Sherrod Brown, chairman of the US Senate Banking Committee.

**Author:** *Valeria Dubkovskaya*