---
title: "He loves cola and hates sports: how the anti-life Elon Musk lives"
description: One of the richest people on the planet, Elon Musk, works 11-13 hours a day with inspiration. But unlike other billionaires, he is not at all interested in work-life balance, sports and other healthy habits. What helps him stay in shape?
date: 2022-06-08T08:00:15+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T08:01:15+08:00
images:
- 6EdjRMO.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Dimitrios Kambouris / Getty Images'
authors:
- Elena Sorokina
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- business guru
tags: 
---

Taking care of your health is a good tone for a wealthy person. Virgin CEO Richard Branson strictly follows the recommendations of his nutritionist. The owner of the Louis Vuitton empire, Bernard Arnault, trains on the tennis court four times a week. But the founder of Tesla and SpaceX Elon Musk, it seems, is not from the healthy lifestyle club. His typical day looks like this: work, sleep, food. And in that exact order.

In order to better focus on work, one of the richest people on Earth sold all his residences. He is no longer distracted by repairs and utility bills. In Los Angeles, where SpaceX is headquartered, he rents a house, and when he arrives at the Tesla plant in the San Francisco Bay Area, he stays with friends. At the same time, the modest billionaire did not give up his personal plane in order to move between cities and be in time everywhere. Is there at least one healthy habit worth adopting from Elon Musk?

Forced to play sports
---------------------

“I have some time for training and a personal trainer, although I haven’t seen him for a long time,” Elon Musk jokes. However, this does not mean that physical activity is abandoned: twice a week, the entrepreneur gives all the best in strength training and gets on the unloved treadmill. “I wish I didn’t train at all,” Musk says, admitting that without exercise it’s difficult for him to keep fit, especially as he ages, when it becomes increasingly difficult to control weight. This problem worries Musk. So much so that one of the functions of the brain implants of his neurotech company Neuralink will be appetite control. The businessman promises that this technology will appear by 2027.

As planned, the neurochip will allow a person to control computers and smartphones with the power of thought, as well as increase the efficiency of the brain. Elon Musk is confident in the safety of the technology, but is unlikely to use it to stimulate his mind: in an interview with the Independent, he claims that every minute of his thoughts brings Tesla $ 1 million. system than start counting calories.

{{< ads >}}

Don't notice lunch but enjoy dinner
-----------------------------------

Elon Musk's attitude to food is controversial. On the one hand, he is ready to take food even intravenously, just not to sit at the dinner table. “If there was a way not to eat, I wouldn’t eat to have more time to work,” he said. On the other hand, he will prefer tasty food to healthy food. “I’d rather eat what I like and live a short life,” Elon Musk told CNBC, asking not to pass these words on to his mother May, a registered dietitian.

Elon Musk loves barbecue and French cuisine with an abundance of pastries, cheeses and meat dishes, which are served with the right wine. However, you can't call him a gourmet. While working at his first IT startup Zip2, the aspiring businessman literally lived in an office and spent no more than a dollar a day on food. Most often, he bought hot dogs or pasta plus a can of cola. Since then, Musk has been addicted to Diet Coca-Cola, which, he says, has added "some kind of infernal ingredient" that is addictive. However, with age, the businessman refused caffeine and stopped ignoring breakfast. As a rule, in the morning it is reinforced with an omelette or a croissant. Lunch on busy working days, he sweeps away in five minutes, without looking at what is on the plate. And he has dinner with something tasty like the mentioned barbecue.

Elon Musk is ready to experiment with food to prove his case to the world. For example, he believes that Europe should not stop the operation of nuclear power plants, but, on the contrary, build new ones. He wants to convince the Europeans by his example: the businessman promises to go to a territory with high radiation and eat local food, as he already did in 2011 shortly after the accident at the Fukushima-1 nuclear power plant. Musk said on his Twitter that if necessary, he will repeat this meal live and prove that "radiation is not as dangerous as many people think."

{{< ads >}}

Six hours of sleep and an early rise
------------------------------------

Enjoy food, even grown near nuclear power plants - yes. But what Musk categorically does not advise is to have a hearty dinner or drink alcohol at night. “Avoid eating 2-3 hours before bedtime and it will improve in quality and overall well-being,” Musk advises. Given the habit of going to bed at one in the morning, the latest time for a billionaire's dinner comes at ten in the evening.

Everything is strict with sleep: Elon Musk needs 6–6.5 hours of nightly rest. Then he wakes up cheerful and immediately ready to parse e-mail. The six-hour sleep formula has been developed over the years, and if it is violated, personal effectiveness decreases. However, for the sake of work, Elon Musk is ready to deprive himself of sleep.

For example, when Tesla was on the brink of bankruptcy in 2018, he slept for 3-4 hours a day for six months right in his office. “I couldn't sleep because of the stress. I had a choice: not to sleep at all, but then the brain would stop working. Or still fall asleep by taking sleeping pills, ”he admitted in an interview with Vox. “Then I didn’t leave the \[Tesla\] factory and didn’t go out for three or four days,” Elon Musk told a reporter from The New York Times. “And instead I could meet friends and spend time with children.” In the early 2020s, Musk is back working the usual 80-90 hours a week and finding time for his sons and daughter.

Read more books
---------------

Elon Musk has seven children. After the death of their first child, he and his wife, writer Justine, underwent IVF twice, in order to surely give birth to not one, but several babies at a time. First there were twins, and then triplets. In addition to five sons from his first marriage, Elon Musk has a son and a daughter from an alliance with Canadian singer Grimes. The daughter was also not without external intervention: the baby Exu Dark Syderil was born to the couple by a surrogate mother.

According to the father of many children, Elon Musk, there should be more children on the planet, because each new generation changes the world for the better, because young people tend to think outside the box. “People have a hard time changing their minds,” he explains. “Therefore, if we live forever, we can become a rigid society in which fresh ideas will not succeed.”

Although his attitude to childbearing is somewhat "technical", Elon Musk, of course, makes sure that his heirs receive a good education. Not finding a decent school for his sons, he opened his own in Los Angeles. It is called Ad Astra, and there is no timetable and program in it: they teach what is interesting to the child right now.

Unpretentious in everyday life and sometimes stingy, Elon Musk, who once did not allow his ex-wife Grimes to buy a new mattress to replace a leaky one, does not spare money for books for children. He believes that the best way to learn to think outside the box is to read a lot. He himself devoured two books a day in his youth, and it was reading fantasy and science fiction, such as the novels of Tolkien and Asimov, that pushed him to the idea of ​​colonizing Mars. If sports, sleep and the process of eating seem to Elon Musk boring activities, without which, alas, it is impossible to remain effective, then the entrepreneur spares no effort or time for books.

_Sources: Forbes, Business Insider, CNBC, Independent, Input, The New York Times, Express, Vox, The Joe Rogan Experience Podcast._

**Author:** *Elena Sorokina*