---
title: "The creator of Viber Magazin: “I haven’t worked in big companies for a single day”"
description: Israeli entrepreneur Igor Magazinnik has repeatedly set ambitious goals for himself - he twice participated in the development of services that were dubbed "killers". Viber shot, Juno - not quite. About what the entrepreneur has learned during this time
date: 2022-06-13T11:39:04+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T11:39:04+08:00
images:
- fpS1TXs.jpg
caption: 'Photo: From the personal archive'
authors:
- Daria Alekhina
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

In 1991, before the collapse of the Soviet Union, Igor Magazinnik left the city of Gorky (today Nizhny Novgorod) and moved to Israel "in search of a new life." He completed his studies there at school and served in the army for three years. In the evenings I worked as a programmer. The army brought Magazinnik together with his future partner, Talmon Marko.

Talmon Marco came up with the idea - to create an exchanger that will allow users to exchange music and videos for free. He pitched the idea to Magazinnik and offered him an option in the new iMesh company. This was in 1999. The shopkeeper was at university then, and torrents didn't exist yet.

Igor Magazinnik recalls that in the US and Israel, no one thought about money then: everyone wanted to get as many users as possible, and only then engage in monetization. However, the idea of ​​free file sharing was not very popular with record companies and film companies - the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and the Motion Pictures Association of America (MPAA) sued iMesh for copyright infringement of music and films. According to Magazinnik, the amount of the claim was crazy. The entrepreneurs tried to settle the dispute. As a result, in 2004, the RIAA reported that the entrepreneurs agreed to pay record companies $4.1 million in compensation and change the nature of their activities, namely, to make a number of files payable.

{{<ads>}}

The next iMesh project was Viber.

Talmon Marko and Igor Magazinnik invested $20 million of their own money in it. Marco traveled a lot at that time, and he had to call up people a lot. Calling via Skype was inconvenient: it was necessary to find out the subscriber's user nickname, add it to the contact list and wait for it to go online. Viber was supposed to be the best version of Skype. Initially, partners conceived it not as a messenger (such a concept did not exist then), but as a service for free calls. “We wanted the user to not have to go through eight circles of hell to make a call,” Magazin said.

He and Marco decided to test Viber in Israel. And the service fired. The partners didn't even have to advertise. The word of mouth worked. People talked about the service to each other. The number of users grew exponentially. Then the partners gave the opportunity to install the Viber application to residents of other countries.

The company grew rapidly. Magazinnik and Marco needed investments to develop it. They entered the Japanese holding Rakuten of the Japanese billionaire Hiroshi Mikitani. However, Rakuten did not want to invest in the service, but to buy it. The deal took place in 2014. Its amount was $900 million. Viber became Japanese.

After selling Viber, Magazinnik worked for Rakuten for some time. After that, again, together with Talmon, Marco took up a new project - Juno. The idea was again bold - the partners wanted to create an "Uber killer". They poached New York's top-rated Uber drivers into Juno by offering them options. The shopkeeper claims the idea worked: Juno had the best taxi drivers. But the company never made it to profit. It developed with the money of investors, and investors decided to stop investing in it. In 2017, Marco and Magazinnik sold Juno to Gett for $200 million. Since 2018, Magazinnik and Marco have been developing PentaLab, a startup incubator.

{{<ads>}}

About competitors
-----------------

Shortly after the deal between Viber and Rakuten, Facebook\* (an organization recognized as extremist and banned in the Russian Federation) announced the purchase of WhatsApp for a record $19 billion. It seemed that Magazinnik and Marco were cheap, but they themselves did not think so. “If someone managed to sell the company for much more, this is not a reason for envy. This is a reason to say: “Well done, guys, it turned out well,” said Igor Magazinnik.

The entrepreneur added that WhatsApp has become a “lifeline” for Facebook \*: “The main reason Facebook \* bought WhatsApp is the fear of an outflow of users from traditional social networks to instant messengers. It depends on geography, but even now young people under 18 do not have Facebook (the organization is recognized as extremist and banned on the territory of the Russian Federation) - not only their parents, but also grandparents are sitting there. For the same reasons, out of fear of being squeezed out by competitors, Facebook \*, according to the entrepreneur, subsequently bought Instagram (the organization was recognized as extremist and banned in the territory of the Russian Federation).

As for Telegram, Magazinnik uses it extremely rarely. At the same time, he admits that Pavel Durov very successfully used the security trend for a quick set of users. The entrepreneur calls it fear-based marketing.

It is curious that the partner of Magazinnik Talmon Marco in 2015 started a skirmish with Pavel Durov. He accused the founder of Telegram of borrowing stickers from Viber. “Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. But theft is not, ”Marko wrote on Twitter. “Please send the entire list to abuse@telegram.org for blocking. It’s a shame that we have something from you: (,” Durov retorted then.

{{<ads>}}

About paid features
-------------------

Igor Magazinnik and Talmon Marko have a particular interest in so-called impact projects that benefit people.

In the case of iMesh, they wanted to give people free access to content, with Viber - to make calls accessible and convenient, with Juno - to improve the working conditions of taxi drivers.

“If we chose between new functionality for our users and the creation of paid things that will bring money to the company, but 2% will use them, we always chose free functionality,” says Magazinnik.

According to him, today, when selecting startups in Pentalab, partners are guided by three criteria. First, they must have good human relations with the founders. “The founders and I should want to go out for a beer together,” Magazin says. Secondly, the startup must have a chance to become something more than a $100 million business. The third criterion is that the startup must do something good for the world. Cryptocurrency, which is now in the focus of attention of many investors, Igor Magazinnik does not include in such projects. “There are a lot of people for whom the crypt and everything connected with the crypt is a religious crusade. I'm not needed there," the entrepreneur says.

About working in a startup
--------------------------

Igor Magazinnik believes that a programmer must make two main choices: what to do - technology or management, and where to work - in a startup or in a corporation. “I have never worked in a big company for a day in my life,” admits Igor Magazinnik.

At the same time, he notes that startups have their own specifics. Firstly, if you work in a startup, then you are more significant for the company than in a corporation, and secondly, you feel a greater sense of belonging to what is happening. You must do much more than what is expected of you.

At the same time, according to Magazinnik, a specialist who comes to work in a startup should be a co-owner. Otherwise it's wrong.  
“If you are invited to a startup for a small salary to work so that “we succeeded,” then say “goodbye” and leave right away,” the entrepreneur advises.

Magazinnik shares the story of how he and his partners chose the language to write the Juno code. “It was a very funny decision. We thought, “Okay, we're not going to use any of the languages ​​that we've used on previous projects. Why? It's much more fun that way."

When developing services, Magazinnik advises choosing a language that any developer with experience can master at a basic level in one to two weeks. Otherwise, even the most amazing code will end up being inefficient.

{{<ads>}}

About communication
-------------------

Igor Magazinnik recalls: when he and Talmon Marko started creating Viber, people called more often than wrote. But today it is a thing of the past.  
“Perhaps we are still thinking in this paradigm – “to discuss the news”, but none of the new generation needs this, enough pictures,” says Igor Magazinnik.

At the same time, the entrepreneur shares that he himself rarely calls, writes more. To do this, Magazinnik uses Viber, WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger (the organization is recognized as extremist and banned in the territory of the Russian Federation).  
The entrepreneur believes that instant messengers help to be in constant contact with other people and simply save time. “But real human communication (and spending time together) is very important, it helps us feel part of something bigger, a company, a team, a group of like-minded people,” he says.

About success
-------------

Igor Magazinnik believes that failures can teach much more than success. “Success is very often determined by chance and the fact that you are right time, right place (turned up in the right place at the right time). It is very difficult to isolate a recipe from the success that was in one company that will work in another place, ”says Magazinnik.

_Sources: Russian Norms, The Bell, Sekret Firmy, Forbes, Cnews, Nizhny Novgorod News, Vedomosti, Space YouTube channel._

**Author:** *Daria Alekhina*
