---
title: "6 options are better than 24: psychologist Sheena Iyengar on the paradox of choice"
description: Sheena Iyengar, a professor at Columbia Business School, argues that a wide choice reduces the chance of making the right decision. What is a “bank of ideas”, how to make the task of choosing easier, and when weak ties are more useful than strong ones - in a selection of her quotes
date: 2022-06-13T11:36:02+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-13T11:36:02+08:00
images:
- SU5AOGe.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Columbia Business School'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

Less is better
--------------

It is customary to think that a large choice is beneficial for both the seller and the buyer. For example, if a store sells not two models of shirts, but 50, then there is a higher chance that a person will be able to choose and buy what he likes. But Sheena Iyengar's research suggests otherwise. She is sure that if the assortment is too large, the consumer will not buy anything at all, and if he does, he will be less satisfied with the choice. This is due to the fact that people often do not see how one differs from the other. As a result, instead of giving opportunities, choice exerts pressure.

According to Iyengar, the more choice, the less chance of making the right decision. “Having more choices doesn’t help people, it can be confusing and distracting,” says Iyengar. She found that people make a less profitable decision when given 10 or more choices. This is proved by the experiment she conducted with psychologist Mark Lepper with jam.

In an expensive supermarket, they set up two tasting tables - one with six types of jam, the other with 24. The researchers found that more people approached a table with 24 types of jam (about 60% of visitors) than a table with six types (about 40% of visitors). But only 3% of people who stopped at a table with 24 kinds of jam made a purchase. At the same time, of those visitors who approached the table with six types of jam, 30% of people bought a jar. Thus, the probability of buying jam is six times higher where there is less choice.

{{<ads>}}

“Over the past ten years, I have discovered three main negative consequences of a large choice. First, too much choice slows down the decision-making process. Secondly, the probability of the worst choice, including in the financial or medical sphere, increases. Third, people are less satisfied with their choice, even if their decision is objectively better,” says Iyengar.

The researcher is sure that this happens because people like to look at a huge number of products, but they cannot really compare them and choose something from this assortment. For manufacturers, this has a direct negative impact - if the market for some product is saturated, they cannot gain a competitive advantage simply by increasing the range.

Iyengar says that it does not matter what choice is to be made - important or not very important. According to her, people are equally confused, wondering what movie to see or what to take the next step in their careers. “It is important to be able to determine for ourselves which decisions are really important, because it is in them that we invest the energy necessary for a deliberate choice,” says Iyengar.

One study shows that the more jobs people apply for, the more likely they are to receive more job offers. However, there is one problem. The more job offers, the less people are satisfied with the choice they made. “In the second study, we noticed that during difficult economic times, when people have fewer job opportunities, they are more satisfied because they feel lucky to get a job. At the same time, they will need more time for their salary to reach a level comparable to that which would be in more favorable economic times,” says Iyengar.

How to make the choice easier
-----------------------------

The expert offers four techniques that will help make the choice easier and will be useful for companies to increase sales.

1.  **Reducing the number of options.**Iyengar says that manufacturers don't like the advice to reduce the range, as they are afraid that their product will lose shelf space. “But in fact, we see the opposite: if you are ready to reduce, get rid of extraneous unnecessary alternatives, sales increase, costs decrease, and the decision-making process becomes more pleasant,” says Iyengar. She gives the example of Procter & Gamble (P&G). When she cut Head & Shoulders shampoo from 26 to 15, sales increased by 10%. Another example is the Golden Cat Corporation. When she cut down her selection of cat litter, profits increased 87% thanks to higher sales and lower costs. Iyengar suggests that manufacturers do a little experiment: ask employees to find differences between them, before offering several varieties of goods to consumers. “If workers can’t tell them apart, then buyers can’t,” she says.
2.  **Specification.** It is easier for a person to make a choice if he sees the consequences of each of the potential decisions. A clear, detailed description of each option and its benefits will help the consumer decide more quickly and be more likely to make the right decision.
3.  **Categorization.** According to Iyengar, it's easier for people to work with categories than with choices because it's easier and more enjoyable to choose. “If I give you a group of 600 magazines divided into 10 categories and a group of 400 magazines divided into 20 categories, you will think that you have more choice and it is much more pleasant, in the second case, because it is the categories that help distinguish them ”, says Iyengar and warns that there is one caveat here - the categories should make sense for the one who chooses, and not for the one who offers.
4.  **Choice from smallest to largest** . According to her, the complexity of the choice should be increased gradually. She gives the example of buying a car. Each solution has a different number of choices. Body color - 56 options, and transmission - four options. Half of the buyers are offered to go from a more diverse choice (starting with 56 exterior colors) to a less diverse one - four types of transmission. The other half of buyers start with four transmissions and then choose a body color from 56 colors. The researcher found that people who go from more to less choices become less interested in options and choose what is offered by default. Those who move from less to more do not lose heart. “If you start easy, you learn to choose,” she says.

{{<ads>}}

Iyengar says that the process of making any decision is a choice. To make it easier for executives who have to make decisions at the company level, the researcher advises always asking yourself: “What real problem am I trying to solve?” and “How do I want to see the ideal solution?” As for collective solutions, in her opinion, everyone should know what problem they are trying to solve. “The group should include people with different experiences who can contribute both to understanding and solving the problem,” the researcher is sure.

Sheena Iyengar is a psychologist and professor at Columbia Business School.

Author of research on the topic of choice. Her work focuses on aspects of decision making, including why people need choices, what influences how and what we choose, and how we can improve decision making. Her research and statements are often cited by the world's media, including [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) Business Week, The New York Times, and The Washington Post. Iyengar has spoken several times at TED conferences on the topic of choice, and is the author of The Art of Choosing. Included in the list of the most promising experts in the field of management Thinkers50.

How networking helps you make a decision
----------------------------------------

Iyengar believes that networking helps in decision making. She recalls that all social ties are divided into two main categories - strong and weak. An example of strong ties can be considered family and friendly ties, and weak ties arise between neighbors, acquaintances, acquaintances of acquaintances, colleagues, etc. According to her, it is weak ties that are important for decision making.

{{<ads>}}

“When you ask close friends or family members for input on an idea or solution, the suggestions you get in return are likely to be minor adjustments. This is because these people come from the same context and perspective as you. In other words, they probably think the same way you do,” says Iyengar. In order to get a wider range of data and suggestions, people from “weak ties” need to be consulted. That being said, it is important not to overwhelm these people with too much information, but instead to propose a problem and describe potential solutions in general terms. So people will receive exactly the amount of information that they can process. This will allow them to give you more diverse feedback and ideas. “Be open and honest in what you do, gathering different opinions.

The researcher reminds that people like to be asked for their advice and opinions, so such conversations help build trust, achieve your goals faster and make progress in solving current problems.

An essential part of seeking feedback is creating an "idea bank", a repository of solutions from which to draw information. You should periodically cross out bad ideas from it and ask yourself how different combinations of them can solve the problems you are facing.

Iyengar argues that if at least three out of ten ideas received through strong or weak ties seem worthy of further study, then this will help to significantly expand the "bank" of potential solutions. “Also, the ideas you get from weak ties will be based on a broader and more varied experience than the ideas you get from strong ties. As a result, they are more likely to be more transformative than those given by people with strong ties,” says Iyengar.

_Sources: Sheena Iyengar TED talks, Columbia Business School articles, Todaishimbun.org interview._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*
