---
title: "How Ukraine is mastering cryptocurrencies against the backdrop of a Russian special operation"
description: During the Russian military special operation, the Ukrainian authorities began to actively develop cryptocurrencies. Here's how the country's approach to digital money has changed and what initiatives have been launched
date: 2022-05-18T02:04:38+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-18T02:04:38+08:00
images:
- czZqOko.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Michael Fortsch / Unsplash'
authors:
- r-insight
interest: Investments
channel: 
- crypto
- currency
tags: 
---

On the second day after the start of the Russian special operation, the Minister of Digital Transformation of Ukraine, Mikhail Fedorov, instructed his deputy Oleksandr Bornyakov to create official government electronic wallets that could accept payments in cryptocurrency. Three weeks later, on March 16, 2022, the law on the legalization of cryptocurrencies in the country was signed by President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelensky. The document, which was adopted by the Verkhovna Rada a week before the start of the military operation, defines the legal status of assets, their classification and ownership.

The Ukrainian authorities have been engaged in the development of the crypto market before - in 2021, the country ranked fourth in the world in terms of the implementation of cryptocurrencies among its citizens (according to the Crypto Research Group, which calculates the corresponding global Chainalysis index). After the start of the Russian military special operation, Kyiv began to act more actively in this direction, using the money received through cryptocurrencies for the country's defense needs.

Since the outbreak of hostilities, the Ukrainian government has [attracted](https://www.ft.com/content/f3778d00-4c9b-40bb-b91c-84b60dd09698) the equivalent of more than $100 million in cryptocurrencies (according to Tradingplatforms.com). A large share of the money raised was spent on defense needs, part of the amount went to social media campaigns.

At the same time, about 20% of the funds raised were [spent](https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2022/04/05/how-is-ukraine-using-crypto-to-fund-the-war) directly in cryptocurrency.

{{<ads>}}

In March 2022, the FTX bitcoin exchange and the Ukrainian staking platform Everstake, together with the Ministry of Digital Transformation of Ukraine, launched a special donation site that accepts payments in more than ten cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin, ether, tether, solana and dogecoin. The conversion of cryptocurrency donations into fiat currencies takes place on the FTX platform, from there the money is sent to the National Bank of Ukraine.

The launch of the resource was announced after sites created by scammers began to appear on the Web, who collected money for personal enrichment, using the slogan Help Ukraine (“Help Ukraine” - English).

Cryptocurrency is also accepted by a new integrated Ukrainian platform for collecting charitable donations. Donors [can](https://news.bitcoin.com/ukraines-new-fundraising-platform-accepts-crypto-allows-donors-to-allocate-funds/) transfer various digital currencies, ranging from bitcoin and its fork (a new virtual asset created based on the same program code as the original cryptocoin) to tether and dogecoin. You can also choose traditional payment methods such as bank transfers, card payments and PayPal transactions.

One-click transfers can be sent by individuals, as well as entrepreneurs and companies. At the same time, donors can choose how the money will be spent. The funds will go to defense needs, the purchase of humanitarian aid and the restoration of Ukraine.

Underwater rocks
----------------

The growing popularity of cross-border transactions in cryptocurrency is associated with certain risks. Among these risks is the threat of fraudulent activities. Launched on Ukrainian platforms, accepting funds in cryptocurrency, you can be sure who and what funds are collected for. However, this does not stop the scammers. For example, they released a fake NFT Peaceful World and misled donors.

In addition, cryptocurrencies are highly volatile, and this makes them less suitable for payments and transactions. In addition, intermediaries such as exchanges can become the target of hacker attacks.

There were also concerns in the US and Europe that sanctioned Russians might use these assets to evade sanctions.

{{<ads>}}

Future plans
------------

In the future, the National Bank of Ukraine may issue its own digital currency. In the meantime, the Ukrainian authorities are testing various ways to use digital assets. So, at the beginning of March 2022, the government announced that it would thank those who donated to its crypto wallets using airdrop: when investors in a particular project receive NFT (non-fungible token, non-fungible token) or other tokens (this practice helps to attract more participants). However, these plans in the financial department were abandoned almost immediately.

Ukraine may also become the first developed country to release its own collection of collectible NFT tokens on the blockchain. “Mass adoption \[of cryptocurrencies\] is now inevitable,” says Sergey Vasilchuk , founder of **the Everstake staking platform .**

Investor support
----------------

Cryptocurrencies and blockchain [turned out to be](https://www.euronews.com/next/06.05.2022/how-blockchain-technology-is-supporting-ukraine-and-russia-by-betting-on-virtual-russian-s) a kind of lifeline for both the Ukrainian and Russian economies. However, donations are not the only way these technologies help those affected by the war.

In early May 2022, the American and Austrian startup Morpher launched an online platform that allows you to bet on Russian stock quotes. All profits made on this platform will be transferred to organizations that support Ukrainian refugees. The Morpher team includes citizens of both Ukraine and Russia, but the founders of the company say they want to raise funds to support the Ukrainian people.

{{<ads>}}

Those wishing to donate funds deposit on the USD Coin platform (a digital stablecoin pegged to the US dollar) and can bet on the dynamics of the share prices of companies such as Gazprom. The underlying shares of the company themselves are never traded on it, so neither, relatively speaking, Gazprom, nor any other company benefits from this.

“These are just interested people or those who have some opinion about how gas prices will behave. They bet in a zero-sum game against others, and whoever guesses wins,” says Martin Frohler, CEO of Morpher. “Anyone who has access to the platform with smart contracts can place bets.”

_Sources: RBC, The Financial Times, The Economist, Bitcoin.com, Euronews_
