---
title: "How to restore peace of mind and faith in the future for yourself and your employees - 5 steps"
description: Frustration, discouragement, inability to do business, etc. ; the consequences of the adaptation shock that many are now experiencing. Psychologist Dmitry Voronin knows how a businessman can cope with stress not only himself, but also help employees
date: 2022-05-23T16:15:34+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-23T16:15:34+08:00
images:
- pMCR0oU.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Jeff J Mitchell / Getty Images'
authors:
- Dmitry Voronin
interest: management
channel: 
- team management
tags: 
---

Problems of adaptation
----------------------

The human psyche, on the one hand, is quite predictable: changes in the external environment - be it the situation in the country or in a single family - awaken a psycho-emotional reaction. Therefore, the fundamental upheavals that the country is going through now are expected to cause a sharp reaction in society. People massively experience adaptive shock: they suffer from fears, phobias and anxieties.

On the other hand, the psyche has phenomenal opportunities for adaptation, especially when it comes to businessmen and leaders. The very essence of entrepreneurial activity implies a high speed of adaptation to changes in external conditions. That is why in the entrepreneurial environment the adaptation shock was lived through in two months and gave way to other problems.

Businessmen got out of their stupor and found a lot of applied tasks around: to find new suppliers and distribution channels, restore unexpectedly failed health and restore motivation to employees who have lost their life orientation. How to do it and where to start?

Step 1. Negotiate with yourself
-------------------------------

The airplane rule “put your oxygen mask on first, then help your neighbor” sounds especially fresh in a crisis. In a state of stress, it is difficult to make sound and balanced decisions, especially if the fate of other people depends on them. Therefore, the number one rule in a moment of shock is to help yourself get out of a state of stress.

For a comfortable existence in a changed environment, a person needs beliefs that are adequate to the new reality. You need to take the time to do this and **answer important questions for yourself** (each person will have their own list):

*   how I perceive what is happening;
*   what point of view do I hold;
*   with whom do you agree?
*   what I think is right and fair;
*   What topics am I willing to talk about?
*   what in the current situation concerns me personally and my family;
*   what choice do I make in the current situation;
*   Why is this the right choice for me?

These beliefs will form the basis of a new model of behavior. If a person decides that it is unbearable for him to live in the current conditions, he will start looking for options: work abroad, relatives in Israel, consider other options. If a person holds a different point of view or realizes that leaving is not his story, he will look for options to continue living in changed conditions. The most important thing is **the awareness of choice** , whatever it may be, and existence in harmony with oneself and one's beliefs.

{{<ads>}}

Step 2: Get your health in order
--------------------------------

**On the example of business leaders with whom I have to work, I see a curious pattern - most of them survived the first shock well, but many showed physiological reactions: chronic diseases** reminded of themselves , headaches, nausea, allergies appeared.

Such a reaction is understandable: when there was a way out of acute stress, adaptation began and an awareness of what had happened appeared, relaxation took the place of stressful concentration. Against this background, pathological processes began to emerge, which in people were in a stopped state.

At the moments of exit from the state of shock, it is necessary to show maximum sensitivity to one's health. Complete an additional check-in at the clinic and refer to the methods of psychotherapy that are used in the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorders. They effectively help to overcome the constant background feeling of anxiety and worry. This is not a strategic therapy aimed at correcting the personality, but rather short-term, focused on **relieving post-stress syndrome** .

Even without the help of psychologists, the body is able to effectively recover from stress, if it is helped: to follow a sleep, walk and diet regimen. This means walking and breathing air for at least half an hour a day, sleeping more than eight hours, regularly eating well, and devoting time to sports. Those who adhere to these banal rules overcome crises faster and more effectively. It is important to remember that the regime is a zone of personal responsibility of a person. It does not depend on the president, or on politics, or on employees. In this matter, it is important to show firmness and determination - to set aside time for sleep, lunch, sports and a walk.

Step 3. Keep the family safe
----------------------------

When you have brought yourself back to normal, it's time to help others, and start with your inner circle - family, relatives, friends and partners. A common story for entrepreneurs is au pairs, nannies, caregivers, and carers. They experience shock and stress in the same way, but, unlike business partners, the safety and health of the family and children depends on them.

Valuable and irreplaceable assistants should be taken care of as close people: give them paid leave, if possible. Provide time and resources to recover or solve problems: travel home, bring relatives, deal with shock.

But at the same time, it is important to draw a line. It is one thing - a business where the wrong decision can lead to financial losses. When it comes to families, the risks are much higher - the safety and mental health of children are at stake. If aggression or inadequate reactions are noticed on the part of assistants, then you need to say goodbye immediately. The person who provides the vital activity of children cannot be in an inadequate state.

{{<ads>}}

Step 4. Help employees
----------------------

Managers and business owners, with very few exceptions, are more adaptable to change than employees. They were the first to realize the magnitude of the change, coped with the shock and found around the subordinates in prostration.

So, the time has come to act wisely - to take responsibility for the state of people and the emotional climate in the team and help employees overcome their stupor. It is important to understand that people are in shock. They did not become bad people or negligent workers, although it may seem so. It is necessary to give them time and create conditions for comfortable work.

For example, a good solution is **not to wait for people to take the initiative** . This approach reduces people's anxiety - a person understands what needs to be done and does not experience the stress of making decisions. Another option is to allocate funds and time to order training for the team on adapting to change or coping with stress.

In a stressful situation, a person especially needs life guidelines. It is important to give the employee emotional support. You can say: "You are a good specialist, so you will always have a job and a salary." Then it is important to show perspective, for example: “We cannot know what will happen in a year, but for the next two months the plan is this: we are looking for new contractors, we are revising goals, we will have to work hard, but our task is to do this and that.” It seems to sound too easy. But such words are very important for the team. They convey the idea that the world has not completely collapsed and there are supports left in it.

{{<ads>}}

Step 5. Act in business
-----------------------

It is obvious that the familiar world is changing and what worked before does not function anymore. This means that new connections, supply chains and products need to be created.

Why should business decisions follow the restoration of balance and order in the family and office? Because making decisions when you are under stress means you will definitely lose. As a rule, a person does not have a ready-made algorithm for actions in a stressful situation. It is not for nothing that a training fire alarm is carried out in offices once a year - so that such an algorithm of action appears.

What **exactly should not be done** ? Make hasty decisions. In these troubling times, it can be very helpful to bring in consultants and specialists to address specific issues. Often these professionals have experience with similar problems and have a broader outlook.

Let me give you an analogy with the divorce process. A person can only want one thing: get rid of a partner and everything connected with him as soon as possible. A good family law lawyer could outline the prospects and risks in advance, recommend a strategy.

It's the same with business: being in a panic or stress from broken contracts, problems with suppliers and buyers, it is difficult to make the right choice. A good consultant can take a detached look at the situation and outline the developments that the business owner may not have been able to see due to the blinders of previous experience.

There are not many hopeless situations. Recently, a friend of mine, whose business was entirely tied to deliveries from unfriendly countries, invited me to an exhibition. I was genuinely surprised: “What are you going there with?” And he, it turns out, has already got his bearings, found Russian equipment suppliers, Chinese, from the CIS countries. His customers also turned out to be ready to meet halfway and change plans, look for alternatives and revise equipment specifications. So life goes on.

**Author:** *Dmitry Voronin, business psychologist*