---
title: "Why Google and Apple value their products’ “naughty” features so much"
description: Steve Jobs' glasses on the iPhone menu, crooked text in Google search, and other product references to popular films are not just a mischief of the developers. Behind such jokes, or Easter eggs, lies a whole strategy. Here's how it helps companies
date: 2022-06-07T18:47:40+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-07T18:47:40+08:00
images:
- xVfT5pW.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Isaac Brekken/Getty Images'
authors:
- olga kiseleva
interest: marketing and advertising
channel: 
- world business trends
- strategic marketing
tags: 
- the economist
---

Have you ever read the full text of the user agreement? WordPress, a site-building service whose clients include the US Presidential Administration and Disney, believes that those who read the text to the end deserve an award. The document is a standard endless list of legal terms, but section 14 on the disclaimer hides a surprise. Among the words about guarantees and non-infringement is a short strange phrase: "Here's a small reward for reading this." By clicking on the link, the user is taken to a page with an image of a delicious Texas-style brisket (American dish, marbled beef barbecue.). After admiring the appetizing dish and taking a short break in the study of documents, you can move on to materials on jurisdictions and rights governing the relationship of the parties.

Stumbling across a so-called Easter egg (a secret or a joke hidden in a computer game, movie, software or book. ) is not the same as seeing a funny ad or subscribing to a humorous social media account. The Easter egg looks like an unexpected good-natured wink of the author, and not a specially invented entertainment. Matthew Lakier and Daniel Vogel from the University of Waterloo in Canada listed several motivations that encourage companies to use Easter eggs in software. For example, with their help, firms try to satisfy the curiosity of users, draw attention to developers and attract employees. But the most important thing is that Easter eggs are funny.

The Google search engine is replete with such hilarious surprises. For example, if you type the word "askew" (English "oblique"), then the content of the page in the browser will be displayed at an angle. Tesla cars are literally crammed with pop culture references: for example, if you enter 007 on the touch screen of a car, the image of the same car that James Bond drove in the movie The Spy Who Loved Me will appear on it. On an Android phone, tapping the software version number several times in the settings menu will open the game (on version 11, the game will unlock when you turn the dial to that number).

{{< ads >}}

However, not all companies leave room for such playfulness in their products. Microsoft got rid of the Easter eggs in software in 2002 when it launched an initiative called Trusted and Secure Computing. The company feared that if users were encouraged to look for "surprises" in the code, they might also find bugs in it. In addition, Microsoft did not want customers to think that engineers had nothing else to do. “It's about trust. It’s about professionalism,” one developer explained in a 2005 blog post.

Of course, any mischief should have limits, especially when it comes to products or services that should be free of errors. Also, flirting should not undermine the credibility of the brand. If Airbus or Boeing engineers spend their time on such fun, it is unlikely that the companies will achieve commercial success. Unleashing the creativity of employees can be dangerous: jokes can easily lead to undesirable consequences. But in order for Easter eggs to please customers, they do not have to be embedded in the code. Playfulness can be reflected in design or playful wording. And often this only strengthens consumer loyalty, and does not weaken it.

Sometimes companies make references to product facts well known to customers. In this way they hope to increase the sense of belonging. For example, on the Marvel website with a 404 error (the page is missing or simply does not work. ), in one of the cases Captain America appears and the slogan “Hydra is currently attacking this page!”. Elon Musk regularly jokes, showing fans his anti-establishment stance. Musk recently offered to buy Twitter for $54.20 a share: 420 is a reference to the community of marijuana users. Musk is known for his jokes. For example, obscene sounds can be heard from Tesla cars.

{{< ads >}}

Companies can use jokes like this to draw attention to the brand. As New Yorker readers wait for the app to load, messages such as "Signing cartoons" and "Checking the facts" appear at the bottom of the screen. Apple uses a round-rimmed glasses icon in the iPhone web browser to display the Reading List feature, in a clear homage to Steve Jobs.

Such irony is, first of all, an attempt to show consumers that there are real people behind the company and its products. Slack messenger offers users the ability to choose different notification sounds. One of them sounds like "hummus". The company explains that one employee from the UK pronounced this word in such a way that it made colleagues laugh, and in the notification the user hears exactly her voice.

This feature is of no use, nor is the story behind it. But the decision to include this sound in the product not only does not undermine the credibility, but also creates the feeling that there is a group of real people behind it. Mischief can seem unprofessional. But it can also be very useful.

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*