---
title: "The Russian economy did not collapse after the sanctions. How does the media explain it?"
description: Until now, Russia, despite the imposed sanctions, managed to prevent the collapse of the economy. How The Economist, New York Times and Foreign Policy explain this and what the Western media predicts for the Russian economy
date: 2022-06-08T13:19:11+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T13:19:11+08:00
images:
- 4AY9qmj.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Anton Vaganov / Reuters'
authors:
- Kira Galkina
interest: investments
channel: 
- economic trends
tags: 
---

A few days after the start of a special military operation on the territory of Ukraine, Russia became the world leader in terms of the number of sanctions imposed against it, overtaking Iran. Many states have closed their airspaces for Moscow. A week after the restrictions were announced, the ruble exchange rate collapsed against the dollar by 30%, and stock quotes of many Russian companies collapsed. The largest foreign firms began to leave the country one after another, stopping production. “The sanctions have affected key sectors of the economy, primarily banking,” admitted Russian Finance Minister Anton Siluanov.

Against this backdrop, it is not surprising that many economists vied with each other to talk about a collapse that is about to bring down the Russian economy. But so far, pessimistic forecasts have not come true, although the special operation continues, and new sanctions against Moscow are introduced almost every day. Analytical materials began to appear in the leading Western media about how Russia manages to maneuver between restrictions and why the economy has not yet “completely collapsed”, as it was predicted by high-ranking European and American politicians. Here are the explanations given by the Western media.

Predictions didn't come true
----------------------------

So far, many data suggest that the Russian economy, despite unprecedented sanctions, does not live up to pessimistic forecasts and is getting back on its feet, [writes](https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/05/07/russias-economy-is-back-on-its-feet) The Economist. Thanks to capital controls and high interest rates, the value of the Russian ruble recovered. Moscow was able to avoid default on its external debt. The real sector of the economy is also surprisingly stable, the newspaper notes.

It must be admitted that since the beginning of 2022, consumer prices in Russia have increased by more than 10%, as the initial depreciation of the ruble made imports more expensive and many Western companies left the country (supply decreased). There seems to be a growing number of firms that are delaying wage payments.

However, real-time indicators of Russian economic activity are largely stagnant. The overall electricity consumption decreased only slightly. After the March lull, Russians seem to be spending quite freely on cafes, bars and restaurants, according to Sberbank analysts. On April 29, 2022, the Central Bank lowered its key interest rate from 17% to 14%. This is a sign that the financial panic that started in February is slowly easing. The Russian economy is undoubtedly contracting, but some economists' forecasts of a 15% decline in GDP in 2022 are starting to look too pessimistic, writes The Economist.

{{<ads>}}

Oil barrier
-----------

The Russian economy was quite closed even before the start of the military operation, and this limited the impact of the sanctions. But the main reason for the stability of the economy in The Economist is called energy exports. Russia supplies the EU with about 40% of natural gas and about 25% of oil. Since the beginning of the military operation, Russia has shipped and exported at least $65 billion worth of energy products through pipelines, according to the Finnish think tank Center for Energy and Clean Air Research. In the first quarter of 2022, the government’s oil and gas revenues grew by more than 80% year on year.

Exports of Russian oil to Europe and countries such as India and Turkey have increased. According to commodity analyst Kpler, India alone has imported 17 million barrels of oil from Russia over the past two months. high quality Urals. This is more than in all of 2021 (12 million). Many states that impose sanctions themselves neutralize the effect of restrictions by purchasing energy from Moscow (in some cases in April 2022, even in larger volumes than a month earlier), [writes](https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/04/22/russia-war-economy-sanctions-ruble/) Foreign Policy.

Despite sanctions against the Russian financial sector, oil exports in April 2022 rose to 3.6 million barrels. per day compared to 3.3 million barrels. per day a month earlier, calculated in Kpler. Thanks to “oil” revenues, the current account surplus in the first three months of 2022 reached almost $60 billion against $120 billion in all of 2021 (only in April 2022 it was $37.6 billion, and this is a record monthly figure in the entire post-Soviet history of Russia) .

According to the estimates of the Bruegel economic institute in Brussels, European energy purchases “inject” more than $800 million into the Russian economy every day.

For many European countries, natural gas is even more difficult to shut down than oil, as it is usually sold under long-term contracts and delivered through fixed pipelines. Gas is not as interchangeable as oil. Moving to alternative major suppliers such as the United States, Qatar or Canada could take years. According to US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen, the ban on Russian oil and gas supplies could potentially seriously harm Europe, but "strangely enough, it will actually have a very small negative impact on Russia," which will be able to find buyers in other countries while raising prices .

On May 4, 2022, the European Commission proposed a ban on the import of all Russian oil, which could come into full force by the end of 2022. Until then, the Russian economy can be expected to continue to move forward, writes The Economist.

{{ads}}

Merits of the Central Bank
--------------------------

The Russian economy is kept afloat largely thanks to the policy pursued by the chairman of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation, Elvira Nabiullina, [writes](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/09/business/elvira-nabiullina-russia-central-bank.html) The New York Times. It is Nabiullina, according to the authors of the article, who is able to turn "a disaster into an opportunity."

This is the second time in the past eight years that the head of the Central Bank has faced such challenges. In 2014, as the Russian economy was hit by both sanctions and a collapse in oil prices, Nabiullina decided to sharply raise interest rates, which helped curb the soaring prices as the national currency weakened. By mid-2017, the inflation rate had fallen below 4%, the lowest level in the entire post-Soviet era. The politically risky move brought the head of the Central Bank international fame as a man who makes tough decisions, and the regulator itself began to be seen as the key economic "brain" of the country, The New York Times notes.

In 2015, Nabiullina was named "Central Bank Governor of the Year" by Euromoney magazine. According to Elina Rybakova, deputy chief economist at the Washington Institute of International Finance, the current head of the Central Bank is “an important beacon of stability for the Russian financial system,” and her reappointment has “symbolic significance” (at the end of April 2022, the Russian parliament approved Nabiullina for a new term). London Business School economics professor Richard Portes considers Nabiullina "an exemplary modern head of the Central Bank" who "does what he has to do, even when it is difficult from a political point of view."

Now the regulator will have to lead the Russian economy through a deep recession and keep intact its financial system, cut off from most of the rest of the world, the newspaper notes. During Nabiullina's tenure as the head of the Central Bank, the share of the US currency in reserves decreased from more than 40 to 11%. Thanks to this, even after the “freeze” due to sanctions, Russia has “sufficient” reserves in gold and yuan.

Sanctions imposed on Russia in 2022 forced Nabiullina to reconsider her traditional monetary policy. After the introduction of the first sanctions, the interest rate was more than doubled to 20%. Capital controls were put in place that helped limit the outflow of money from the country. The head of the Central Bank also ordered the closure of share trading on the Moscow Exchange and eased the regulation of the banking sector in order to maintain lending. These measures stopped the initial panic and helped the ruble recover, according to The New York Times.

Delayed collapse
----------------

So far, the Russian authorities have been able to contain the collapse of the financial system and avoid bank failures, said Pierre-Olivier Gurinsha, chief economist at the International Monetary Fund (IMF). But further sanctions targeting the Russian energy industry could have a significant impact on the country's economy.

Experts expect a serious reduction in lending available to Russian individuals and legal entities in 2022, while the economy will fall by 8-15%, writes Foreign Policy. Some economists are talking about a decline of 20% or more in the next few years. The International Monetary Fund predicts a decline in Russia's GDP in 2022 by 8.5% with a further reduction of 2.3% in 2023.

World Bank experts are more pessimistic and believe that by the end of 2022, the Russian economy may shrink by about 11.2%, including due to a decrease in domestic demand.

In this case, in monetary terms, the economy will lose $ 200 billion. But this will only be the beginning of a difficult period, said Timothy Ash, senior strategist for emerging markets investment company Bluebay Asset Management. Russia will remain in default on its external debt for years to come, he said, “isolated from international capital markets, devoid of investment, increasingly cut off from both international trade and business and Western energy and commodity supply chains, suffering from a recession and stagnation, falling living standards, increased capital flight and brain drain.” 

At the same time, despite the fact that consumer prices in Russia are growing faster than 10%, by the end of 2022 inflation will probably not exceed 25%. 

According to analysts at Goldman Sachs, the current trends in the Russian economy are getting worse, but weekly data indicate some slowdown in price growth.

According to International Monetary Fund (IMF) economist Alfred Kammer, “Russia has no market financing needs at this stage,” but corporations are saddled with more than $400 billion in outstanding debt and will struggle to service loans in the long term.

{{ads}}

Threat of unemployment
----------------------

The situation will worsen as Moscow continues its military operation on the territory of Ukraine, writes Foreign Policy. According to Yale University, Western and multinational companies are massively leaving or suspending their activities in Russia (we are talking about about 800 corporations out of 1200 operating in the country). These include major brands ranging from IBM and Microsoft to Cargill, as well as many of the biggest consumer goods players such as Kellogg's, Nokia and Panasonic.

Meanwhile, it is still difficult to accurately calculate how many international companies really intend to leave Russia. Some large US firms, such as pulp and paper company International Paper and industrial conglomerate Koch Industries, continue to operate in the country, as do many European, Indian and Chinese corporations, including German steel giant Thyssenkrupp. Some companies go to great lengths to avoid social stigma, such as selling generic snacks as "essentials". Others are trying to circumvent US President Joe Biden's administration's ban on investment in Russia through legal loopholes.

According to Moscow Mayor Sergei Sobyanin, about 200,000 people are at risk of losing their jobs in the capital alone, which means that the real figure “should be ten times higher,” said Jeffrey Sonnenfeld of the Yale School of Management. According to Edward Fishman, a former US State Department official, adviser on Europe and Eurasia and a leading expert on sanctions in the political forecasting department, the “wave of unemployment” will sweep over Russia in 2022 almost regardless of what happens next with the sanctions.

Other scenarios
---------------

The main question is whether Russia will be able to adapt the economy to long-term isolation, writes Foreign Policy. Other states that have faced massive sanctions, such as Iran, have managed to do so. If Russian banks become technically insolvent, the government could keep them running for a long time with subsidies from energy sales. But the refusal to import consumer goods, manufacturing materials and components, as well as the growing burden on Russian finances, will ultimately cause serious damage to the economy.

“In general, developments in the medium term will depend on how effectively Russia can replace imports and redirect \[energy\] exports,” Clemens Greif, an analyst at Goldman Sachs, quoted The Telegraph as saying.

However, the most difficult thing in assessing the state of the Russian economy is taking into account all the unknowns. So far, experts do not know for sure how the military operation will develop or how European countries will react further. "Because of the unprecedented nature of what's happening, we're really not in a position to predict as economists," Doug Hostland, deputy vice president of TD Economics , [told the CBC.](https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/russian-economy-sanctions-analysis-1.6440166) According to him, the main uncertainty concerns the European ban on the supply of Russian oil and gas. Will all additional measures actually be implemented? “The prospects for financial markets and the geopolitical situation depend on what Europe is going to do next,” he concluded.

**Author:** *Kira Galkina*