---
title: "Amazon CEO: You need to rethink the business when everything is fine"
description: Andy Jesse joined Amazon when the company was still a startup. After 24 years, he became its CEO. Why change a business if no one wants it, how Amazon Web Services appeared and what an American rock band can teach an entrepreneur - in his quotes
date: 2022-06-01T00:10:28+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-01T00:10:28+08:00
images:
- Y42cTHb.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Mike Blake / Reuters'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

About the way to Amazon
-----------------------

When Jeff Bezos asked Andy Jesse to take over as Amazon CEO in 2021, he was so dumbfounded that he asked for a couple of days to think. “I was surprised,” says Jesse, recalling a conversation with Bezos. “I didn’t expect it, I didn’t ask for it, I liked my job at the time, but I was certainly flattered and excited by the prospect.” A few days later, Jesse called Bezos back and told him, "I'm in."

Initially, Jesse did not see himself in business. He was fond of sports and dreamed of a sports career. Realizing that he did not have the qualities necessary for professional sports, he tried to become a sports commentator on radio or television, but did not achieve success in this. He then worked for a company selling collectibles. He ended up going to Harvard Business School, where Amazon found him. Jesse joined the company as a marketing manager in 1997, three years after the startup was founded. At that time it was only an online bookstore.

Jesse has come a long way at Amazon. He recalls that this was his first job after university. “I took my final exam at Harvard Business School on the first Friday in May 1997 and started working at Amazon the following Monday. No, I didn't know what my job would be or what position I would have. It was very important to Amazon that I come on Monday,” says Jesse. He started as a marketing manager.

{{< ads >}}

Jesse said he was drawn to Bezos' desire to turn the startup into something more than an online bookstore. He advocated that the next step for Amazon after selling books would be to sell music. Jesse wrote a business plan for this new direction and began to lead it. In 2003, Bezos chose Jesse as a technical assistant - he attended all the weekly meetings of the head of Amazon. That year proved to be a milestone both for the company and for Jesse's career. At one of the meetings, Amazon programmers complained about the technological infrastructure that had to be created for each project. Jesse suggested creating cloud computing power for everyone at Amazon to use. “The idea was that anyone in a garage or dorm room would have access to services with the same cost structure as

About rethinking
----------------

This is how the Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud platform was born. The new project quickly took off and had an impact on the entire technology industry. “When we wrote the business plan for AWS, no one dared to predict that the company would become so big so quickly,” recalls Jesse. In its 15 years of existence, AWS has become the leader in the cloud computing market, overtaking Microsoft. “It is very difficult to build a business that will exist for a long period of time. To do this, you will have to rethink and update your strategy,” says Jesse. People are afraid of any change, even when the need is obvious. At such a moment, according to Jesse, you need to be able to overcome your fear and decide to change, "even if it means taking apart yourself." This is exactly what Amazon has done over the years.

Jesse experienced first hand how difficult it can be to change when Amazon opened up an online store to third-party sellers. It was a controversial move at the time, he said. But Amazon executives saw the success of online retailers like eBay and concluded that this is what consumers want. “After all, if customers want something, whether it's good for your business or not, it will happen,” he says. And so the company created the Amazon Marketplace platform, which now accounts for about half of Amazon's sales.

“Typically, rethinking happens in moments of desperation — companies on the brink of collapse or bankruptcy decide they need to start a new life,” Jesse muses. \- If you wait for this moment, then you can not even count on success. You need to rethink the strategy when everything is going well. You have to update all the time."

About sports and business
-------------------------

Although Jesse had to give up his dreams of becoming a professional athlete, sports remained his main passion. He even set up a sports bar in the basement of his house, which, as he likes to say, has seven televisions. Jesse sometimes invites former and current Amazon employees there to watch sports.

As the Amazon CEO admits, his sports experience influenced his approach to business and life. “Through tennis, I learned what happens when you really work hard at something and what happens when you don’t,” says Jesse. He constantly compares business and sports. “Often in tense moments, people tend to take a conservative approach to the game, because they are just trying to avoid losing, and not trying to win. I think this is true in business as well. It’s easy to be cautious, but the reality is that if an entrepreneur wants to get better, then you have to take risks and be prepared to fail,” he argues.

Jesse also admits that his father influenced his approach to work. One day he told him: "Whatever you do, either do it well or don't do it at all." Since then, this phrase has become Jesse's life motto, and he encourages his employees to treat their work that way.

{{< ads >}}

{{<info>}}
Andy Jesse is the CEO of Amazon.

Born in 1968, received a bachelor's degree from Harvard University and an MBA from Harvard Business School.

In 1997 he came to work at Amazon. In 2006, he launched a cloud computing platform known as Amazon Web Services (AWS). In 2016, Jesse was promoted from Senior Vice President to CEO of AWS. In 2020, the company became the market leader in cloud services, occupying 41% of the market. In 2021, the division generated 74% of operating income and 15% of revenue for Amazon.

In 2016, the Financial Times named Jesse Person of the Year.
{{</info>}}

 music and ideas
---------------------

One of Jesse's favorite rock bands is the American Foo Fighters. He believes that the lyrics of some of the songs describe well how to build a successful company. For example, the Amazon CEO recalls these lines: “You need blind faith/no false hope.”

“I have always believed that these words apply very well to business. When a new idea comes up, you need that conviction, that blind faith that it can work. And there will be many people who will say that nothing will work. Skeptics will tell you why the idea won't work. But an entrepreneur must be adamant, he must blindly believe in his idea, ”Jesse is sure. He cites his experience with AWS, which he led from the beginning, as an example. He had to convince other company executives to trust their data to Amazon's new cloud service. He challenged the team to "prove that, in the long run, AWS means reliability and security."

{{< ads >}}

But at the same time, one must beware of "false hopes." “You can't go ahead with an idea without talking to customers and people who might use it and making sure your idea is interesting. In business, you need blind faith, but not false hope, ”says Jesse. Every product he or the company has ever worked on has taken this approach, he says. He believes that too many company executives harbor false hope because they only see the reports of subordinates, which sometimes do not contain real data. According to him, the leader should strive to find out what customers really think about the company, get real feedback and data.

More Tips for Aspiring Entrepreneurs from Andy Jesse
----------------------------------------------------

*   First, decide what your company wants to build.
*   Gather a team of people who want to innovate and improve the customer experience.
*   Encourage employees to look for and come up with new ideas.
*   Provide employees with the right tools to implement their initiatives.
*   Strive to experiment.
*   Get ready for mistakes and failures.
*   Be prepared to make many attempts before one of them succeeds.

_Sources: GeekWire, Vanity Fair, Fast Company, Time, The Verge, Business Insider, Inc. Magazine, Harvard Business School podcast, CNBC, The Wall Street Journal, Medium._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*