---
title: "“Now I am poor again”: what is behind the collapse of stablecoins"
description: In early May, another collapse occurred in the cryptocurrency market. This time, the cost of stablecoins, tokens pegged to real currencies or goods, decreased. What is the reason and how do investors and regulators react to the fall?
date: 2022-05-21T02:01:06+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-21T02:01:06+08:00
images:
- 0QzqZxw.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Nick Lukhminsky
interest: Investments
channel:
- crypto 
tags: 
---

A sharp drop in the value of one of the tokens, which is customary for the crypto market, occurred on May 12. However, this time, instead of bitcoin, ether, or any other volatile cryptocurrency, stablecoins fell into a steep peak - a “crypt” tied to the value of goods or fiat currencies like the US dollar.

The biggest losers were Tether and Terra Luna, which were normally around $1 and dropped to $0.95 and $0.22 respectively. Investors hurried to get rid of the cheaper tokens and only aggravated their situation - at the moment, the cost of Luna fell to 0.

Despite the fact that the capitalization of stablecoins and their scope is more modest than that of a conventional cryptocurrency, the collapse of the two tokens drew attention not only on the stock exchange, but also in the US Treasury. Officials noted that what is happening increases the risks for all investors. Probably, the department is worried not at all because of the "crypto", but because of the usual shares of companies that are associated with it. For example, Coinbase, whose shares fell from $130 to $53 on May 11th.

What caused the volatility in the stablecoin market, how dangerous is it, and why does Kathy Wood believe in Coinbase despite the stock crash?

{{<ads>}}

Unstable token
--------------

The total capitalization of all stablecoins is now [approximately](https://www.natlawreview.com/article/regulators-focus-terra-and-its-ust-stablecoin) $180 billion, which is almost three times less than the value of all bitcoins in circulation. Tether (USDT) and Terra Luna (UST) at the end of April 2022 in total accounted for more than half of this amount: the capitalization of the first is $83 billion, and the second is about $33 billion.

Luna and the UST stablecoin included in its ecosystem were the first to go to the bottom. The cost of the latter, as conceived by the developers, should always be approximately equal to $1, but on May 9 this parity evaporated - the cost of UST on that day was only $0.13.

UST is the so-called algorithmic stablecoin. Unlike peers like USDT and USDC, which hold fiat currencies as a reserve to back tokens, UST relies on a complex mix of code and Luna cryptocurrency. “The essence of an algorithmic stablecoin is that instead of traditional reserves that ensure its stability, the developer uses a system of unstable instruments that together affect the rate of such a stablecoin. It’s literally a way of telling the market that you’re trying to build something stable out of a bunch of unstable ones,” [explains](https://www.euronews.com/next/2022/05/12/terra-luna-stablecoin-collapse-is-this-the-2008-financial-crash-moment-of-cryptocurrency) cryptocurrency critic David Gerard.

The developer fund UST Luna Foundation Guard promised to ensure the stability of the exchange rate with the help of bitcoin. For these purposes, the organization purchased 80 thousand bitcoins for about $3 billion, which were planned to be spent if the UST rate fell down. The fund's portfolio also included BNB, USDT, USDC, and Avalanche tokens. Their foundation founder Do Won also promised to spend on saving the course in an emergency. Together with the Luna Foundation Guard, Vaughn also founded Terraform Labs, the operator of UST.

On May 9, when the UST rate collapsed, the Luna Foundation Guard did not comment on the situation. Only a week later, the fund [shared](https://twitter.com/LFG_org/status/1526126703046582272) on its Twitter the disappointing news that it had spent absolutely all the tokens on its balance, unsuccessfully trying to return the stablecoin to the $1 mark. And Terraform Labs announced that it was temporarily suspending operations with UST until "there is an understanding of what to do next." Soon operations with the token were resumed.

{{<ads>}}

Following UST, the value of the Luna cryptocurrency rushed to zero. According [to](https://www.elliptic.co/blog/what-happened-to-the-3.5-billion-terra-reserve-elliptic-follows-the-bitcoins) analysts from Elliptic, holders of two tokens lost about $42 billion in a week. Serious losses, in particular, were [confirmed](https://twitter.com/cz_binance/status/1526410849954541568) by the head of the Binance crypto exchange, Changpeng Zhao: “Now I’m poor again.” According to Fortune, the crypto exchange invested about $1.6 billion in Luna. After the collapse, this amount decreased to $3 thousand.

The collapse of UST and the sale of a large volume of cryptocurrencies negatively affected the market: on May 12, the bitcoin rate, for example, fell to $25.4 thousand. This time, the US Treasury paid attention to the collapse of the largest stablecoins. The head of the department, Janet Yellen , [said](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/13/regulators-anxious-about-stablecoins-like-tether-after-ust-collapse.html) at a congressional hearing that the situation does not threaten the overall stability of the country's financial system, but the risks are growing rapidly.

Linked by one chain
-------------------

As it turned out, the UST collapse was just the tip of the iceberg. It was followed by a sharp decline in the course of the stablecoin Tether (USDT). In just one day, on May 11, its capitalization decreased by $7.6 billion.

Tether is the third largest cryptocurrency in the world by capitalization and the largest stablecoin. Its operator is Tether Operations Limited, a subsidiary of the Bitfinex cryptocurrency exchange. As soon as the decline became noticeable, the operator said that the situation was under control, and investors were not fleeing the sinking ship.

“Since May 11, users have successfully withdrawn $7 billion from Tether. Each request was fully satisfied, ” [said](https://tether.to/en/how-tether-usdt-is-able-to-maintain-its-peg-when-other-stablecoins-fall/) Tether Operations Limited. The company also noted that it always tries to keep enough liquidity in its account just for such cases. Unlike Luna and UST, the Tether stablecoin is backed by the US dollar.

{{<ads>}}

According to the stablecoin regulations, the minimum amount of a direct withdrawal from Tether is 100 thousand, and the holders of a smaller amount of USDT have to sell their tokens "with hands". Most likely, the statement by Tether Operations Limited refers to a direct withdrawal of funds.

The actual owner of Tether, the cryptocurrency exchange Bitfinex, has a controversial reputation, the media say. First of all, due to the fact that users cannot verify who owns the stablecoin and the operating company. Also in 2021, the New York State Attorney [had](https://ag.ny.gov/press-release/2019/attorney-general-james-announces-court-order-against-crypto-currency-company) claims against Tether and Bitfinex. According to officials, the companies hid from the public the loss of about $850 million in client funds. At that time, crypto-entrepreneurs got off with a fine of $18.5 million.

Year of dead stablecoins
------------------------

Conceptually, stablecoins are designed to solve one of the main problems of cryptocurrencies - excessive volatility. However, despite this, such collapses occur in the market is not the first time. The scheme is always the same: the price of “crypto” falls, which makes investors panic and sell their holdings. This pushes the token further down into the “death spiral”.

More recently, a similar situation [occurred](https://www.fastcompany.com/90751716/panics-and-death-spirals-a-history-of-failed-stablecoins) with the Basis Cash stablecoin. It was launched at the end of 2020, and in less than a month it was able to reach its maximum capitalization of $30.7 million. And already in January 2021, the Basis Cash token fell in price three times, from $1 to $0.30. Its work was based on an algorithm similar to UST, and the cryptocurrency adjacent to the stablecoin was responsible for the stability of the rate.

Around the same time and on the same principle, another stablecoin was launched - Empty Set Dollar. Having appeared at the end of 2020, it reached a maximum capitalization of $22.74 million, and then fell to zero in just a few months. In 2021, a stablecoin from Iron Finance called TITAN followed a similar path.

{{<ads>}}

Bad period
----------

The collapse of UST and USDT occurs against the backdrop of a general fall in the crypto market. Over the past month, it has lost about $800 billion in capitalization, according to CoinMarketCap. Bitcoin has fallen in price by a third in a month and now costs $26,000 apiece (at its peak, its price was $68,000), its capitalization is $600 billion. Ethereum has lost almost 40% of its value over the same period and is now valued at $1,800. , its capitalization [is](https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/does-cryptocurrency-crash-pose-threat-financial-system-2022-05-11/) $285 billion.

But that's not all: volatility on crypto exchanges has also affected traditional investment instruments. In particular, the shares of the Coinbase cryptocurrency exchange collapsed. Their price decreased by 60%, to $53.72, including on the day of the report for the first quarter of this year - by 26%. Coinbase revenue was $1.16 billion, while it was expected to reach $1.48 billion. Net loss was $430 million, while quarterly profit reached $771 million a year earlier. The number of active users decreased in the quarter from 11.4 million to 9.2 million people, the total trading volume during the same time fell from $547 billion to $309 billion.

{{<ads>}}

However, the situation with the price of the company's shares was partially corrected: on Tuesday they rose in price by 14%, to $70, after the company said it plans to suspend hiring new employees, [writes](https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/coinbase-stock-price-bitcoin-hiring-slowdown-crypto-exchange-market-cryptocurrency-2022-5) Business Insider. The main reason for the fall of the cryptocurrency market and securities of related companies, according [to](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-09/bitcoin-flirts-with-lowest-level-since-2021-as-equities-swoon) the head of the Singapore Vauld crypto exchange Darshan Basij, is a general decrease in investor appetite for risky assets against the backdrop of tightening the monetary policy of the Fed.

However, Coinbase has not lost its appeal to institutional investors. Investor Kathy Wood's funds in mid-May [made](https://www.barrons.com/articles/coinbase-stock-has-been-pummeled-by-the-crypto-crash-cathie-wood-remains-a-believer-51652443010) major purchases of the company's shares. The ARK Innovation ETF bought 187,000 shares of Coinbase, the ARK Next Generation Internet ETF bought 33,000 shares for about $3 million. On her Twitter account, Woods explained her funds' investment by including blockchain as one of the most promising areas for investment. In addition to him, it included genome sequencing, adaptive robotics, energy storage and artificial intelligence.

**Author:** *Nick Lukhminsky*