---
title: "Irresistible Sale: 3 Presentation Elements That Make You Buy"
description: Slides, graphics, and even the personality of the author are not the main things for a presentation. The guarantee that a product or service will be bought lies in the offer itself, which she talks about. In order for an offer to sell itself, a presentation needs three elements - and these are
date: 2022-06-03T19:35:19+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-03T19:35:19+08:00
images:
- 5dtkUAg.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Dan Kennedy
- Dustin Matthews
interest: sales
channel: 
- b2b sales
tags: 
- Alpina
---

_From Tough Presentations: How to Sell Anything to Anyone by Dan Kennedy and Dustin Matthews, Alpina Publisher_

The process of persuading people can be complex, incredibly complex, relatively simple, or very simple. One of the defining parameters of this process is the proposal itself, but many people do not understand this. They worry about the parts of their presentation, especially its visual elements: slides, graphics, videos, story, and personality of the presenter.

But in the end, people buy what they really want to have and do what they want to do. If the proposal takes this into account, it can in itself lead to very, very good results, even in the case of a very ordinary, but high-quality presentation.

The advantage of irresistible offer architecture allows you to:

*   engage in sales without undue effort;
*   sell products at a premium price, not at a discounted price or at the level of competitors;
*   easily attract new customers, patients or customers.

I offer you a template that allows you to create such an offer on the fly. It has three main elements.

"Hot buttons": what to do if they are not
-----------------------------------------

Different people have different "hot buttons", that is, what hits them to the quick. When you click on one, there is a strong reaction, for example: I want exactly this - and right now - regardless of what I have to do and how much I have to pay. You have at least one or more of these buttons:

*   a button that controls your temperament;
*   a button that turns on sexual attraction;
*   etc.

These are common knowledge. But let's say you have a product or service that fails to activate hot buttons for members of your audience, and you can't figure out why. To solve this problem, I assume that no one in my audience will have a "hot button" in response to a story about my product, service, or offer.

I may be giving a presentation on cancer and colonoscopy. Or I'm the accountant asking clients to take another look at their tax returns for the past three years. There are advantages and benefits in my proposals, but they do not excite listeners.

Then you can turn to bonuses. One of the most famous examples of this approach is the television advertisement (which is also essentially a presentation) for Sports Illustrated magazine. Sports Illustrated's excellent presentation could have helped sell a pretty good number of subscriptions, but sales increased several times after the magazine offered future readers a football-shaped phone (yes, this was before the era of smartphones, when everyone used landlines). Even those who were not particularly interested in the magazine itself could not refuse such an unusual device.

That's right, they couldn't refuse. And that builds links to element 2.

{{< ads >}}

2\. Relationship between price and value
----------------------------------------

Almost everything in this world has an intrinsic value: something that is directly related to the essence. And this essence should be present in any powerful presentation of any product or service that focuses on personal and emotional reasons that are important to the audience. The presentation should talk about the value that the object of your proposal has.

Marketers often talk about the so-called price-value equation. You can also draw a scale yourself with two axes, on one of which the number of people will be located, and on the other - the value. When the perceived value of an offer is much higher than the advertised price, many of your listeners will succumb to the laws of the irresistible equation of price and value. They will have an internal dialogue with themselves: “No, I will not buy this. No, I still won't buy it. No-e-e-e-t. Okay… Oh my God, why didn’t I buy it right away?”

This effect can be achieved in two ways.

The first and obvious one is to make a serious discount on the real or artificially inflated price. The problem is that this path can cost a lot of money and even compromise the credibility of your offer. This tactic is not liked by many speakers, and if you have negative feelings about what you are forced to do, the audience will definitely notice it. Of course, you can go this route, but be careful.

I prefer the other way - the way of incessant contrast. For example, in a presentation used by orthodontists who offer excellent treatment at premium rates, Dan Kennedy compares other decisions that rich and discriminating people make when buying higher quality goods and services at a higher price: furniture for the home, cars, tours. to other countries and hotel services.

His orthodontist clients charge between $7,000 and $9,000 for Invisalign® dental braces, which some parents feel is too much for children's braces. Dan gently reminds them that they spend the same amount on first-class flights and five-star hotels on vacation, although they can always choose something cheaper.

In the field of consulting seminars, you can link the cost of services to the amount of a possible increase in income. If, for example, a seminar costs about $5,000, and you earn - or intend to earn - $200,000 a year, then your seminar costs will be a measly 2.5%. We tell listeners: do you really think that you can listen to the whole seminar and not get the knowledge that will allow you to increase your income by at least 2.5%?

{{< ads >}}

3\. Confirmation
----------------

The first reason someone in the audience doesn't accept your offer is because they remember that they once confided in a person like you. This man made promises very similar to yours, but people felt they had been abandoned or deceived. This may explain why out of 100 people who find the strength to listen to you to the end, only 20 will buy your product.

People can gain confidence in several different ways. The first is related to the provision of guarantees. The second is with something larger, with which they are able to identify themselves. An example would be a company that donates a certain percentage of its proceeds to a charitable organization or some project that is important to the audience.

It is important if a business or a social movement has a mission. Trump went down that path, and it made people realize that they were supporting something more important and significant than a regular deal. Such stories will add credibility to your presentations and create a positive reputation.

In addition, the audience can be motivated with an additional bonus - the opportunity to use the proposed product or service before purchasing it.

As you understand, the elements listed above are interconnected with each other. If you manage to use all three, it will be very difficult for people to say "no" to your proposal - which is your goal!
