---
title: "Just Be Quiet: How to Listen to Your Customer Properly - 15 Steps"
description: "In negotiations, you often want to talk a lot: there is an opinion that this way there is a higher chance of closing a deal. In fact, this is what often breaks it. What customers are missing is silence, or rather, an attentive listening from a sales manager. How to practice it?"
date: 2022-05-27T00:53:57+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-27T00:53:57+08:00
images:
- wMQyvJ8.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images'
authors:
- alpina
interest: sales 
channel: 
- b2b sales
tags: 
---


Let's talk about what and how to do and not to do to make your hearing professional.

**Rule 1: stop talking**

Remember: when you speak, you sow. When you listen, you harvest. If you don't collect, others will. Be greedy, don't give someone what is rightfully yours.

**Rule 2: show that you are listening**

Take an open pose meaning "I am one big ear!". Follow her, she should be of obvious interest. The purpose of a professional posture is to encourage the interlocutor to talk.

**Rule 3: Eliminate Annoying Factors**

Turn off your phone. Create the most comfortable environment possible. If you receive an interlocutor on your territory, this is easier to do: put things in order on the table, remove unnecessary things, fold everything neatly. But even on foreign territory, you can try to organize a place for negotiations if its owner did not do this. The fewer annoying factors, the better the result.

And one more important point: do not negotiate standing up. Listening while standing is much more physically difficult, and the effectiveness of listening is reduced.

{{< ads >}}

**Rule 4: Don't get emotional**

This is necessary, although it can be difficult, especially if you are naturally temperamental. I have a friend who is an expert in the organization of hotel services for VIP clients, an Italian by birth. One day I went up to him and asked: “Are you really Italian?” \- "Yes". “Then tell me: how do you do it, with your temperament? How do you manage to force yourself to listen to customers?

His reaction surprised me a little; he looked around, lowered his voice and said: “You know, with great difficulty. I sit, I hold on to the chair with my hands, I fidget all over. But I'm listening. you can't imagine how hard it is for me! Incredibly difficult! But how else. Nothing else with these people!”

What do I want to say with this story? Grab what you want, but listen to the interlocutor! Control yourself!

**Rule 5: Never interrupt**

When you do this, the interlocutor “flies out” of the conversation, he is no longer with you. The body is near, but attention and thoughts are very far away. Therefore, the effectiveness of your conversation tends to zero. Let the interlocutor finish the thought.

Why does one person interrupt another at all? Either he heard something with which he fundamentally disagrees and became indignant, or he “caught” a good idea and is afraid to lose it. Neither one nor the other gives the right to interrupt. Remember or write down a good idea, and if you disagree with something, listen to it to the end! It is completely possible that you simply did not quite understand the interlocutor, because you did not listen well. You may strike him down with your arguments, you may win the battle, but you will almost certainly lose the war.

**Rule 6: Keep notes during the conversation**

Someone smart said, "The only thing I have to remember is where I can find what I need." Without notes, you won't remember half of the conversation. If you already have the habit of using a notepad and pen, great! But I also urge you to pay attention to the voice recorder, which is in every smartphone. Record your conversations. No need to do this defiantly, the entry should be hidden.

This is useful for working on your voice. However, recording conversations has another purpose: to improve the quality of your listening.

**Rule 7: Stop Assuming**

This is inappropriate and inefficient. Why shouldn't there be many closed questions in your dialogue? Because a closed question is a guess. You can rack your brains as much as you like and try to read the thoughts of the interlocutor, but never get to the bottom of the truth. Why these complications when you can just relax, ask a direct open question and listen?

**Rule 8: Try to Understand Feelings**

Feelings are very important. Initially, we always make decisions at the level of “I want!” or "Like it!" \- and only then we evaluate how expedient, profitable, necessary, acceptable it is. Therefore, emotions are incredibly important. Meanwhile, sellers often do not pay attention to them, operate with numbers and think that this is the main thing. But it is precisely from sensations that the disposition towards you, the desire to cooperate, interact is born.

**Rule 9: Don't plan your answer while the other person is talking**

If there is a hell for bad salespeople, then the salesperson's cardinal mortal sin is biased listening. What it is? As soon as the interlocutor opened his mouth - and the seller is already thinking: yes, I know what you will say! And the channel through which information is received from the interlocutor is immediately closed. After such an attitude, the seller communicates with himself, with his own reflection, with his own “I know”, and not with the client.

Listen to the end. The person has spoken - pause. Consider the answer. Set up eye contact. And only then answer.

**Rule 10: attention to the peculiarities of the interlocutor's speech**

It happens that the interlocutor does not speak too clearly, competently or beautifully. For an expert, this is just an excuse to listen carefully and try to help a person express his thoughts and desires. If the interlocutor constantly repeats, you can easily get bored. But this is not a reason to be distracted, but only an additional task for you.

If a person is unable to stick to one thought and jumps from one topic to another, your task is to delicately return him to the right track. Don't try to jump up and down after him. This is often an indicator of uncertainty, and the interlocutor will be grateful if you can streamline the conversation.

{{< ads >}}

**Rule 11: Don't Argue About Values**

Sometimes our opinions and values ​​don't match. This is not a reason to immediately object and rush to the attack. Your task is to understand why the interlocutor thinks so.

Situations like these are a good opportunity to reflect on your own beliefs and prejudices. If in dialogues you often encounter a conflict of values ​​and this interferes with your negotiations, then it probably makes sense to analyze such cases very carefully and understand who exactly is the cause of the conflicts.

It is possible that you should clarify your own views and make sure they are reasonable. This does not mean in any way that I am encouraging you to bow where the wind blows. But be careful if the statements of the interlocutors often make you feel offended or offended. Most likely, no one intended to upset you on purpose.

**Rule 12: Control how much you talk**

If you are negotiating over the phone, you can even write “Talk less, listen more” on a piece of bright paper in large letters and place it in a conspicuous place. Start the internal stopwatch (or look at the clock, if possible). Until it's your turn to talk about the product in detail, don't talk for more than 30 seconds in a row. Less is better. Of course, for this you will have to formulate your statements as clearly as possible, without unnecessary words.

There is such an approach. To stop the flow of your speech in time and consciously pause while listening to the interlocutor, use a simple ballpoint pen. Pinch it in your fist so that your thumb is above the cap. When you start speaking, release your finger, lifting it above the button. This unnatural position will remind you that it's time to round off. After being silent, lower your finger, press it on the cap button all the way and hold it while your interlocutor speaks. You will be forced to hold the cap so that it does not click until the interlocutor completes the story.

I advise this option only to those who absolutely cannot stop themselves in any other way. If you control yourself without improvised means, then you don’t need to use them: you will be distracted by them, instead of honing other equally useful skills.

**Rule 13: fight boredom**

What to do if you are unbearably bored? Do you understand that you should listen, but you are overcome by yawns? No amount of empathy helps?

Remember: there are no uninteresting topics. There are boring people, it's true. But any topic contains something attractive. Try to disengage from the interlocutor as a person and listen only to what he says, trying to find a reasonable, useful grain in each phrase. In other words, don't force yourself to get carried away by the person — instead, get carried away by the topic.

Try to find for yourself the answer to the question: what can be interesting for me here? Quite often, something useful is found exactly where we least expect to find it. If you have an attitude that you will acquire something useful, then the likelihood that it will be so is greatly increased.

{{< ads >}}

**Rule 14: Accept Your Share of Responsibility for the Dialogue**

Responsibility for communication lies with all participants in the process, including, of course, the listener. Your role is active, despite the minimum of words. If you do not understand something, this does not mean that the speaker is to blame.

**Rule 15: Give space to pauses**

If there is a pause in the conversation, this does not always mean that the interlocutor has finished his speech. Make sure he says whatever he wants to say. No need to use any break in speech to insert a word. I never tire of talking about the benefits of pauses; ten seconds of silence can give you more than an hour of fervent persuasion.