---
title: "What ideas about your own psyche prevent you from moving forward"
description: 'Anxiety must be treated, motivation is rational, “self-sabotage” exists: the therapist debunks these and other erroneous ideas about the structure of the psyche that prevent us from becoming better'
date: 2022-06-11T17:13:57+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T17:13:57+08:00
images:
- SOrJd1n.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Markus Winkler / Unsplash'
authors:
- Britt Frank
interest: health
channel: 
- mindfulness
tags: 
---

Britt Frank is a certified psychotherapist, trauma specialist and educator. She has received awards for her teaching work at the University of Kansas. She also speaks and writes extensively about achieving and maintaining emotional well-being.

In his new book, The Science of Idleness: How to Break Inertia and Move Forward, Frank busts popular myths about mental well-being that keep us from coping and moving forward. In this article, Frank retells the key ideas of his book.

1\. We need anxiety
-------------------

People often come to therapy suffering from severe symptoms and think that all they need is to "get rid" of their anxiety. Sometimes anxiety can be psychologically draining and in some cases it really needs to be treated before any other measures can be taken. However, trying to get rid of anxiety in general is just as pointless as trying to turn off the fire alarm in your home.

The sound of a fire alarm is unpleasant, but it does not harm the house: it is a sign of a problem. Accordingly, anxiety is not a character flaw or a disease, but something like a “check engine” light on the dashboard of our brain. If we turn off or silence the alarm indicators, we won't know where the problem lies. Anxiety is a landmark that points us to a real or imagined threat, pain from the past, or a situation in the present that requires our attention. Anxiety can pull us out of our own chaos. In other words, we need it.

{{<ads>}}

2\. Motivation is not related to thinking
-----------------------------------------

We like to work with the logical, analytical part of our brain, so we like to think about problems, develop strategies and action plans. Thoughts do help shape behavior and, therefore, reality, but you can’t get out of the “stagnation” with the help of rational reasoning. Motivation is primarily a matter of physiology, not thought.

There are mechanisms in our nervous system that are responsible for the physiology of survival, known as the “fight, flight or freeze” responses. If you're lethargic (freeze), if you're stuck in fight or flight (increased sympathetic activity, such as panic states or idea races), you can't think about how to deal with it because it's a physiological state. Just as you can't mentally get rid of an indigestion or get a car going if it doesn't have gas, you can't just think positive and expect it to somehow turn into action.

Turning off the amygdala response is where the key to motivation is. The amygdala is the "SOS button" in our brain that sounds an alarm when something goes wrong. Even if, logically, you don't want to get stuck in the physiology of survival, you cannot influence this automatic process. Our brains are designed to recognize danger and look for a safe place. This means that if your brain, consciously or subconsciously, believes that you are in danger, then it triggers the survival response. If your brain feels threatened, it puts your body into a state of overexcitement or inactivity. We call this procrastination and lack of motivation.

In fact, there is no such thing as "lack of motivation." Our brains are motivated to either mobilize and move towards our chosen goal, or do whatever it takes to stay safe.

{{<ads>}}

3\. “Mental health” is a physiological process
----------------------------------------------

Let's first agree on terms. Mental health doesn't really have much to do with our minds. A nervous system that is stuck in a fight-flight-or-freeze state will exhibit the same symptoms as those seen in clinical depression or pathological anxiety. But the reaction of the nervous system is not a disease or disorder.

Our physiological survival responses are often misdiagnosed and misnamed mental illnesses. The inner pain we feel is real, and it's worth noting that depression can be life-threatening and seriously affect the quality of life. However, it is important to know that much of what we call "diseases" is often the work of our brain, which is simply doing its job.

There is no shame in the fact that you have this or that disease - it is part of human existence. However, it should be noted that every year 40 million Americans are diagnosed with mental disorders, while the disease is considered an exceptional phenomenon. It should not be considered the norm. Most psychotherapists have not studied the physiology of mental health and do not know how to evaluate such reactions of the body. If we move from discussing mental health as a mental process to discussing it as a physiological process, then we will be more likely to discover ways to help us get out of "stagnation".

If the mind is stuck in a “fight, flight or freeze” state, then this is not a sign of illness: it simply misjudges external threats and circumstances. A brain that feels safe is unlikely to show these symptoms. This does not mean that we do not need therapy or drugs. However, it is worth abandoning the usual approach to analyzing our disturbing feelings and thoughts. We need a new model that is more accurate from a biological point of view.

{{<ads>}}

4\. There is no such thing as "self-sabotage"
---------------------------------------------

We all sometimes make choices that negatively affect our lives. But “self-sabotage” is a misnomer, because actions that disrupt our plans, destroy our relationships, and destroy our mental health are not intentional attempts to harm ourselves. Such destructive behavior is rather an irrational attempt at self-defense.

Reasoning rationally, you may come to the conclusion that you do not need any psychological "protection". However, unconscious emotions and automatic physiological processes are difficult to control. What we call “self-sabotage” is often the result of changes in life. And all changes, even positive ones, cause a feeling of loss and grief. We have a desire for repetition, the search for patterns and the formation of habits, so any innovation and rejection of the status quo can be qualified by our amygdala as a threat.

Understanding that "self-sabotage" is an irrational attempt at self-defense does not justify any manifestation of such behavior, but helps to prevent it. The process of achieving any goal requires emotional risk, establishing new boundaries in relationships, financial resources.

5\. All behaviors are functional.
---------------------------------

Our habits and obsessive desires often prevent us from living our lives to the fullest and achieving what we want. Not all behaviors are acceptable, but they are all functional—otherwise they wouldn't exist at all. One example of the functionality of unfavorable behavior is resistance to positive change. Any change brings grief to one degree or another, but modern Western society lives by the principle of "just think positively, live your best life." The idea of ​​talking out loud about the things we fear the most and showing off the parts of ourselves that we don't like just doesn't sit well in my head.

{{<ads>}}

Addiction is an example of a highly toxic yet functional behavior. If I am addicted to any substance, behavior, person or way of thinking, then I will not have to deal with what I am trying to mask with this addiction. So far, the prevailing view is that addiction is a disease. But there is a huge amount of research indicating that this is not always the case. As a survivor of drug addiction and a therapist at a drug treatment facility, I have yet to meet a single person who struggles with addiction and who does not have some kind of hidden pain point. Addiction is trying to relieve this pain. If you try to understand the causes of even the most destructive behavior, you will almost always find unresolved trauma or grief.

While "explanation" is not synonymous with "justification," it's important to know that focusing on correcting behavior at the expense of understanding its causes almost always makes us inert, preventing us from acting. Failure to determine the true motivation for destructive behavior causes us to behave in the same way over and over again. In truth, trying to avoid working on yourself takes a lot more effort than doing it. You don't have to make huge changes in your life to get out of the state you're stuck in. Start with small steps. You will not have time to look back, as you find that you have moved off the ground. Once you start taking action, you will immediately see positive results.

###### This material was first published in Fast Company magazine or at [https://www.fastcompany.com/](https://www.fastcompany.com/) . The original article can be read [at the link](https://www.fastcompany.com/90752143/theres-no-such-thing-as-self-sabotage-a-psychotherapist-debunks-the-most-common-concepts-that-keep-us-stuck) . © 2021. All rights reserved. Material courtesy of Tribune Content Agency.


**Author:** *Britt Frank*
