---
title: "8 phrases you should never say in a job interview"
description: At interviews, job seekers usually describe themselves as “creative” and “hardworking”. But general words won’t help impress a recruiter. Here are some ways to avoid clichés and show off your best qualities.
date: 2022-05-31T00:17:37+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-31T00:17:37+08:00
images:
- 2orXHqC.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Dim Hou / Unsplash'
authors:
- Amanda Augustine
interest: self development
channel: 
- career
tags: 
- fast company
---

In everyday life, people rarely need to describe themselves. However, when it comes to finding a job, recruiters expect job seekers to be confident about their skills and potential value to the team.

It doesn’t matter if the HR manager asks you to describe yourself directly or asks leading questions like “how would your colleagues describe you?” or “what are your strengths?”. There is only one goal - to better understand the personality of the candidate and decide whether he is suitable for the chosen position.

Although it can be embarrassing to talk about your strengths to strangers, the willingness to present yourself is very important. After all, if the person himself is not confident in his abilities, why should a potential manager hire him?

However, the line between confidence and arrogance is very thin. The difference lies in the manner of communication and in the words that the candidate chooses to describe himself. Hardly anyone wants to seem conceited or insincere, but many still use the same hackneyed expressions that experts advise to delete from the resume.

Here are a few words that job seekers should forget, as well as tricks that will help you better showcase your strengths and win over recruiters.

"Hardworking"
-------------

It is unlikely that at least one person during the interview will honestly say that they do not want to work. Therefore, although hard work is very important for a leader, the candidate's simple statement will not convince anyone. Instead of describing your qualities to a recruiter, it is better to give an example that clearly demonstrates your diligence.

{{< ads >}}

Recall situations from your professional life: tell how you made a significant contribution to a project or how you achieved an important goal. This will showcase how your hard work has benefited your former boss. After that, you can use the STAR (situation, task, action, result) method to summarize your professional victories: first briefly describe the problem situation, then the task, tell about your actions and their results.

"Team player"
-------------

The ability to work well in a team involves more than just the ability to get along with colleagues and the very fact of working in a group. A good team player can make compromises when necessary, shows respect for colleagues and listens to their needs, knows how to make joint decisions and set common goals.

There are many ways to showcase your teamwork skills during an interview. You should not take all the credit for talking about successful group projects. Even if your role was key, do not forget about the help of colleagues. For example, when talking about your idea that helped solve a company problem, it is important to mention how colleagues helped to realize the project or gave useful advice. Even better, use the pronoun "we" instead of "I" when appropriate. This will help demonstrate the presence of a "team" mindset. And in order to correctly understand the recruiter’s questions and answer them briefly and clearly, it is worth using the skills of “active listening”: pay attention, ask clarifying questions and not be distracted.

"Active and Passionate"
-----------------------

If you want to describe yourself at the interview as an active and enthusiastic employee, then here is the main rule: do not talk, but demonstrate. There will be no need to tell the recruiter about your interest in the job if you come to the interview in an enthusiastic mood and energetically answer questions - the approach and behavior will speak for themselves.

In order not to worry about whether it will be possible to show your interest in the work to a potential employer, you need to pay attention to preparation. Research information about the company and potential position so that you feel more confident during the interview and can show enthusiasm for professional prospects.

In addition, it is important to correctly assess your condition before the interview: you may need to either cheer up a little or calm down. This will help you not look too nervous or, conversely, lethargic in front of the recruiter. It is useful to plan your time before the interview, for example, meditate, listen to your favorite music, drink coffee. It is worth paying attention to food. Certain foods contain natural beta-blockers (“adrenaline suppressors”) and will help reduce anxiety, while a breakfast high in protein and complex carbohydrates, on the contrary, will provide a burst of strength and energy.

"Flexible"
----------

Now, employers are really more interested than ever in employees who easily adapt to new conditions. In fact, according to a TopResume survey, after the pandemic, “adaptability and flexibility” have become the most important characteristics of candidates for hiring professionals.

But don't tell your HR manager that you're good at adapting to any circumstance. Show the recruiter your willingness to work in a new environment with examples. You can talk about your professional achievements during the pandemic: let’s say you managed to implement online onboarding for new employees, come up with good ideas for delivering company services online, or successfully redirect your team’s efforts in line with the company’s new goals. Concrete examples will demonstrate to a potential employer your flexibility and ability to navigate unforeseen circumstances more eloquently than words.

"Creative"
----------

Although describing yourself as "creative" and "original" is considered at least bad form, for some positions these skills are really necessary. In order for the employer to really be convinced of their availability, it is better to remember situations when your creativity and courage were beneficial at a previous job.

{{< ads >}}

It is important for an applicant for a creative position (designer, artist, product manager, author, marketer, etc.) to be sure that the portfolio contains all the latest projects, and a link to it can be found at the top of the resume. It is worth preparing for a conversation about the creative process, non-standard ideas in your projects and their search.

If the position involves creative problem-solving (another priority for many employers), be prepared to explain why you enjoy solving complex problems and talk about situations in which it was necessary to think outside the box in order to solve a problem or achieve company goals.

Lacking specifics on resumes can confuse potential employers. But it's even worse when they sound at the interview. It's time to learn how to talk about yourself in a way that the recruiter will notice you with examples and funny stories that showcase your skills and strengths.

{{<info>}}
_About the author:_

_Amanda Augustine is a specialist in several recruiting companies (TopResume, TopInterview and TopCV) with over 15 years of experience in the industry. She is a certified career coach and resume writer, helping professionals find jobs._
{{</info>}}

###### This material was first published in Fast Company magazine or at [https://www.fastcompany.com/.](https://www.fastcompany.com/.) The original article can be read [at the link](https://www.fastcompany.com/90751364/8-words-you-should-never-use-to-describe-yourself-in-an-interview-and-what-to-say-instead) . © 2021. All rights reserved. Material courtesy of Tribune Content Agency.