---
title: "How to present the result of work so that it is appreciated: 3 ways"
description: 'Just doing the work is not enough - it is also important to present it correctly. Three presentation techniques will help convince customers of the quality of the result and achieve recognition of merit'
date: 2022-06-07T08:47:15+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-07T08:47:15+08:00
images:
- pwrip7a.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Sam Mcghee / Unsplash'
authors:
- Valentina Ingsots
interest: "self development"
channel: 
- flexible skills
tags: 
- fast company
---


People appreciate the result of work more when they know how much effort was spent on it. That is why Rolls Royce cars are still assembled by hand. So a variety of employees should also take this principle into service. This is the opposite of the famous "fake it 'till you make it" credo. When the job is already done, you need to explain to clients and colleagues how much effort it cost - so they will appreciate the result more, and it will be easier to work on the task.

Record a video explaining your work
-----------------------------------

In the marketing studio Wonder Shuttle, experts work together with the authors to promote texts. Company founder Herbert Louis believes that if all authors do the same, the number of orders they will increase. Studio employees conduct and record interviews with the author of the text, then write the advertising text on his behalf - the author edits it, and then the studio publishes and promotes this text.

A year ago, Louis began sending out videos to clients detailing how a particular ad post was created. He wanted each customer to understand exactly what guided him and his team during work. For example, sometimes he "highlighted" the statistics used and the methodology of the research with which the data were obtained, or talked about the specifics of the language and structure of the text. For example, in an explanatory video, you can answer the following questions:

*   Where did you draw inspiration from and what did you do to follow it?
*   What key creative decisions did you make?
*   What was the most difficult part of creating the current version of the text and why? How did you overcome difficulties?
*   What kind of comments and feedback do you need from the recipient of the video?
*   By what date is it important for you to receive them?

If you're freelancing or working for a company and don't want to make an extra appointment, record a short video explaining the content you've prepared. The addressee will most likely appreciate this, and there will be less misunderstanding, which will simplify the discussion process.

For larger projects, you can record a video with examples and slides for 10-15 minutes. If you are submitting a short draft, five minutes is enough.

Make an appointment to give the necessary clarifications
--------------------------------------------------------

Like a video with comments, the meeting provides an opportunity not only to explain to potential clients or the manager your train of thought, but also to immediately answer questions. The goal is to communicate the results of your work as clearly as possible. The presentation looks more convincing, makes a stronger impression on the audience and allows you to describe the project in more detail than the video.

In the era of remote work, it is as easy as possible to organize such a presentation, and you need to use this opportunity - not only to present the result, but also to explain the thought process behind it.

If this presentation represents an important moment in your work (for example, a milestone in a project, a sales pitch, or a product trial), it's best to do it live. This way, first of all, you will make sure that all participants show enough attention, and you will also be able to pay attention to their non-verbal reactions, feel the general atmosphere of the meeting and get immediate feedback.

Accompany the text with short comments
--------------------------------------

If it's not possible to record a video and give a live presentation, leaving text explanations for someone who will evaluate your work is also a good option. In the same way that an editor leaves questions and suggestions for the author in a draft, you can comment on your own work - answer possible questions in advance and explain certain decisions.

This, firstly, allows the addressee to plunge into your creative process, and secondly, it serves as evidence of your initiative and readiness for dialogue. This will make a bigger impression than if you just send your work to the recipient.

Don't expect the project to make a good impression on its own; it makes sense to make an effort to ensure that it is appreciated. The result that you send to clients, superiors or colleagues must be able to present it correctly.

It may seem that the video or slides with explanations only take the time of the customer or the management, but in fact this is not the case. In this way, you can focus on those fragments and stages of work for which you most need feedback, convince the customer that you have put in enough effort, and earn their trust. When you present your work in front of someone and this person sees how much effort you put into it, understands exactly how you approached the task, then his interest in the success of the project grows.

This approach will help you attract attention and will serve as a sign of confidence in the result. In addition, recipients can always choose not to study "extra materials" - but this is unlikely.

{{<info>}}
_About the author:_

_Herbert Louis is the author of the book Creative Doing, a collection of 75 techniques for unlocking creative skills for work or hobbies. He also creates a monthly newsletter recommending the top three books on creativity and runs the Wonder Shuttle studio._
{{</info>}}

**Author:** *Valentina Ingsots*

###### This material was first published in Fast Company magazine or at [https://www.fastcompany.com/](https://www.fastcompany.com/) . The original article can be read [at the link](https://www.fastcompany.com/90751351/youve-done-the-hard-work-heres-how-to-get-the-recognition-you-deserve) . © 2022. All rights reserved. Material courtesy of Tribune Content Agency.