---
title: "Russia is waiting for galloping inflation. Why is it dangerous for business?"
description: The Central Bank predicts that inflation this year will be 20%. However, in reality, we are likely to face galloping inflation - the prices of individual goods will rise by 40-50%. Experts of the financial accounting service "PlanFact" - about what to do for business
date: 2022-06-06T08:00:36+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-06T08:00:36+08:00
images:
- WZWMe6W.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Evgeny Razumny / TASS'
authors:
- Daria Sopina
- Anna Petrenko
interest: Finance
channel: 
- Financial Strategy
tags: 
- plan fact
---

This year there is a lot of talk about inflation all over the world. We understand what it is and how it is connected with the profitability of a business.

How to explain inflation with simple examples?
----------------------------------------------

Inflation is understood as a rise in prices and a change in opportunities for buyers with a certain amount. For example, in 2012, a client could pay 1.5 million rubles. and pick up three new Hyundai Solaris cars from the showroom, and this year this money may not be enough even for one car.

I must say that inflation is a completely normal phenomenon for the economic system, and without it, development stops. But it's good if prices don't rise too fast. Therefore, economists always talk about several types of inflation:

*   low (creeping) - prices grow by no more than 3-5% per year;
*   moderate - prices rise up to 10% annually;
*   galloping - prices can rise up to 50% per year;
*   hyperinflation - prices rise by more than 50% annually.

Economists believe that moderate inflation is necessary for the normal development of the economy. If it is low, then the economy is not developing fast enough. On the other hand, when inflation is high, the economy stops developing: the cost of loans rises, and the level of production falls. This is not good for business.

It turns out that inflation needs a balance, so it is controlled. In Russia, this is done by the Central Bank, which operates within the framework of 86-FZ. For example, this year the Bank of Russia is focusing on the key rate, which it first raised and then lowered. These maneuvers also change lending rates, and therefore affect purchasing power.

{{< ads >}}

Rosstat is responsible for measuring inflation. Since 2022, big data has been used for this, including information from online cash registers and receipts.

Main Causes of Inflation
------------------------

Economists identify three main causes of inflation.

*   **Growth in demand.** Buyers take a lot of goods, and sellers and manufacturers increase the cost of transport, production and purchase of raw materials. In addition, sellers quietly raise prices, as customers are willing to pay more to get what they want.
*   **Deficit.** Demand is high. Buyers are waiting for goods, but manufacturers can not cope. Or there are problems in logistics when it is not possible to quickly deliver goods to retail outlets. This immediately leads to higher prices.
*   **Devaluation.** We often encounter this when the ruble depreciates. If suppliers buy goods for foreign currency, they immediately change the price after the exchange rate changes. So, for example, motor oil on Monday can cost 4 thousand rubles. for 1.5 liters, and on Wednesday - already 5 thousand rubles.

What inflation will be in Russia this year
------------------------------------------

Now the economic situation is rapidly changing, and it is not clear what will happen at the end of the year; but the Central Bank made a forecast for inflation in the range of 18-23%. This is influenced by all known factors.

*   Many companies are closing or suspending business in Russia, some are moving their activities to other countries. For example, foreign suppliers stopped supplying bleach for office paper, and the price of office paper skyrocketed.
*   The exchange rate of the ruble has changed, and this has led to a rise in the price of many goods brought from abroad. Now the ruble has stabilized, but prices are in no hurry to roll back. Because some entrepreneurs made purchases when the dollar was more than 100 rubles.
*   Investors have reduced the amount of investment in the Russian economy, and this will lead to the fact that the market will slow down the pace of development.
*   Some goods are no longer found in Russian stores, but demand from the population has been preserved. This leads to an increase in cost. The situation should be saved by parallel imports, but they have not yet come into full force.

Inflation: real and official
----------------------------

_Valery Polkhovsky, Senior Analyst, Forex Club Group of Companies_

“I think that in general we can expect inflation around 20%, as the Central Bank suggests, but for some goods it will be much higher, about 40-50%. By the end of the year, the situation will improve, and in 2023 inflation will already be around 10%.”

{{< ads >}}

How is inflation related to earnings?
-------------------------------------

Sometimes it seems that inflation is a totally negative phenomenon, but it is not. If it is moderate, investors are not afraid to invest in business development. Businesses are growing, producing more products and hiring more employees. All this has a positive effect on employment, the market and the general economic situation.

The negative comes with galloping inflation, which is expected in Russia this year.

*   Lending rates go up and companies stop making loans.
*   Investors are in no hurry to invest in the development of projects, because inflation eats up investments, there is not enough money all the time.
*   The business as a whole cuts costs to increase its own profits.

Therefore, moderate inflation is suitable for business and the economy, while galloping inflation leads to a crisis.

How a business does not lose profit when inflation is too high
--------------------------------------------------------------

There is a simple rule for business: the level of profit must be greater than the level of inflation. How to do it? Try to cut costs, but so that business processes do not suffer. For example, cheaper suppliers can be found for manufacturing, some companies may transfer employees to a remote work format or hire self-employed people to reduce tax deductions.

With high inflation, it is easier to survive for companies that do not need constant injections of money, that is, those who receive constant profits and have their own money for development.

**Author:** *Daria Sopina, Anna Petrenko*