---
title: "Six myths that prevent you from getting enough sleep"
description: If you can't sleep, it means you haven't tried hard enough or your mattress is too soft - common misconceptions. Somnologist, head of the Center for Sleep Medicine at the Rehabilitation Clinic in Khamovniki Roman Buzunov explains what will definitely worsen your sleep
date: 2022-06-11T09:09:27+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T09:09:27+08:00
images:
- yHHKGTP.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Roman Buzunov
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
tags: 
---

We are so accustomed to some statements about sleep that it does not even occur to question them. We believe them automatically, but in vain. Many of the “common facts” about sleep are actually myths. Belief in them is at least not beneficial, and at most harmful. Let's dissect these misconceptions.

Myth number 1. A person should sleep eight hours a day.
-------------------------------------------------------

Indeed, most people need an average of eight hours of sleep, the standard being somewhere between seven and nine hours. But this is like an average height: the individual need for sleep for some can be four or 12 hours. This is a natural reality and cannot be changed. Even before the birth of a person, the norm of sleep that he will have to sleep in adulthood has already been established for him.

In a sense, people with little need for sleep are genetically lucky: they have more productive time in the day, which allows them to do more in life. So, Elon Musk sleeps no more than five hours, and Donald Trump claims that four hours is enough for him. But even with a greater need for sleep, a person is not infringed in anything - take, for example, Einstein, who slept at least ten hours a day.

Myth #2: Sleeping before midnight is more valuable than after.
--------------------------------------------------------------

On the Internet, you can even find tables that give specific equivalents of the value of sleep at different times. According to them, an hour of sleep before midnight is equal in its usefulness to several hours before morning.

This belief causes some people to go to bed earlier. But it is incorrect. The optimal time for going to bed is individual for each person, as is the need for sleep, which was mentioned above. Among us there are owls, larks and representatives of the intermediate type. If an owl man (by nature he prefers to go to bed late) is sent to bed at ten o'clock in the evening, then he will still not fall asleep.

“The sleep hormone melatonin is synthesized during sleep from 11:00 pm to 1:00 am. At this time, a person should sleep! — say the authors of the tables mentioned. But let's think logically. Imagine a person who lived (sleeped and was awake) in Moscow and then moved to, say, San Francisco. The day for him changed places with the night. Well, now he is obliged to sleep in the afternoon according to local time, because melatonin is produced at this time? Of course not: it will take a couple of weeks, and the body will rebuild. After all, the production of melatonin is primarily regulated by lighting, the change of day and night, the time of rising and going to bed.

The main recommendations for a healthy sleep: keep a regular sleep schedule and get enough sleep. And it doesn’t matter if you fall asleep at ten in the evening or at two in the morning.

{{<ads>}}

Myth number 3. Sleeping on a hard bed is good for you.
------------------------------------------------------

Many are deeply convinced of this. Therefore, despite the discomfort, courageously choose the hardest mattresses.

A hard surface for sleeping is only good for a very small group of people with spinal pathology. By the way, scoliosis, osteochondrosis and other common back problems do not apply to her. People with fractures, gross deformity of the spine and other rare disorders have to sleep on a hard bed. A healthy person does not benefit from rest on a hard surface. In addition, it is simply uncomfortable and not physiological. Points of excess pressure in the places of protrusions of the body, constant tracking of arms and legs, reflex muscle tension - all this does not create prerequisites for deep sleep.

Russians, unlike Europeans and Americans, in 80% of cases adhere to the belief that sleeping on hard is useful. Such data in their studies are given by companies - manufacturers of mattresses. Apparently, the reason for this is historical memory. Recall iron beds, armored nets, which eventually turn into hammocks. Or boards that were placed under the mattress to make the bed more even. The culture of sleep began to take shape in Russia only at the beginning of the 21st century. Not everyone has yet understood that the belief about the healing rigidity of the mattress is a myth.

Myth #4: Alcohol is a great sleeping pill.
------------------------------------------

Alcohol relieves stress and helps you relax. As a result, a person can fall asleep more easily. This is used by some people, especially those in whose lives there is stress.

Alas, it is impossible to recommend alcohol for regular intake. Its frequent use leads to addiction: the initial dose becomes small, it has to be increased. It also leads to addiction: a person begins to need alcohol constantly and can no longer fall asleep without it. In addition, contributing to the onset of sleep, alcohol disrupts its structure. It makes sleep more superficial and intermittent - it is not for nothing that they say that the dream of an alcoholic is short and disturbing.

{{<ads>}}

Myth #5: Snoring is just a cosmetic flaw.
-----------------------------------------

Approximately 30% of men and 10% of women [snore](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16227718/) . Most of them believe that this is the norm, and do not rush to the doctor. But by ignoring the problem of snoring, they risk their health. A third of snorers have frequent pauses in breathing during sleep. This condition is called obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. In severe cases, a sick person can have up to 500 stops of breathing per night lasting from 10 seconds to a minute or more, because of which he does not breathe in the amount of 3-4 hours of the total sleep time. Each cessation of breathing is actually an attack of suffocation, which cannot go unnoticed for health.

Sleep apnea increases the risk of hypertension, atherosclerosis, coronary heart disease. Sleep apnea increases the risk of heart attack and stroke by five times. The disease is accompanied by severe daytime sleepiness, against which the risk of an accident due to falling asleep at the wheel increases six times. At the same time, a person with respiratory arrests himself may not know anything about them, because he is sleeping and does not feel them.

People with heavy snoring are strongly advised to see a sleep specialist and undergo an overnight study to detect sleep apnea - polysomnography.

Myth number 6. If you can’t sleep, you need to try hard
-------------------------------------------------------

Can't sleep? Count sheep, pretend to be asleep, do some relaxation exercises and try, try to fall asleep… Many people do this, although in reality it is not necessary at all. Moreover, it can lead to severe insomnia. It is enough to try 12–15 times and not fall asleep, for example, due to stress, and a conditioned negative reflex “bed = insomnia” is formed in a person. In this situation, a person may painfully want to sleep, but as soon as he approaches his bed, the dream “takes away like a hand”.

If you have not fallen asleep within 15 minutes, then get out of bed, go to another room and do some quiet activity (read a book, put things in order, meditate). Go to bed only when you really want to sleep. And don't get up late the next morning. Even if you don't get enough sleep that night, you will fall asleep faster the next night due to accumulated drowsiness.

**Author:** *Roman Buzunov, sleep medicine doctor, head of the Sleep Medicine Center of the Rehabilitation Clinic in Khamovniki, professor, doctor of medical sciences, and honored doctor.*
