---
title: "The US market is finally fairly priced. This is what Rule 20 says."
description: According to the “Rule 20”, the American market after a strong “overheating” finally received a fair assessment. Despite the relative balance in the market, experts believe that its decline will continue, but advise cautious buying of quality companies
date: 2022-06-27T01:02:03+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-27T01:02:03+08:00
images:
- 1SbbTq2.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- Karina Karimova
interest: investment
channel: 
- shares
tags: 
---

After a strong decline in the US market since the beginning of the year, the valuations of many popular companies have also decreased. The capitalization and multipliers of the tech giants have deflated, as have the numbers of fast-growing but unprofitable companies.

Thanks to loose monetary policy and financial stimulus, the US market was able to [recover](https://quote.rbc.ru/news/article/611b5f509a794719247382eb) from the lows of the 2020 crisis in just 1.5 years.

From 2009 to 2020, [the longest bull market](https://quote.rbc.ru/news/article/60afa8502ae596303d847adf) in history lasted, with global stocks up 237%. The pandemic then unleashed the fastest bear period in history, but it quickly faded away.

The American S&P 500, Dow Jones and NASDAQ Composite indices have been actively growing since the crisis of 2008 (except for a strong fall in the spring of 2020) and reached all-time highs by the end of 2021. Company multiples rose to all-time highs last year, with the market's adjusted P/E 40 times [the average](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/stock-market-is-massively-overvalued-warns-this-strategist-184827907.html) as of January 2022 . Experts noted that the last time they saw this was in 1999 before the collapse of the dot-coms.

In 2021, U.S. companies [recorded](https://fortune.com/31.03.2022/us-companies-record-profits-2021-price-hikes-inflation/) very high profits: they grew by 25% in a year, to $2.81 trillion, which was the strongest annual increase since 1976. And taking into account taxes, the figure grew even more significantly - by 37%, and this is a record since 1948. But inflation played an important role in the growth of corporate profits, which in the United States accelerated to the highest levels in 40 years.

How the "Rule of 20" works
--------------------------

But after the Fed began raising rates, the US market began to fall and by May moved into a "bearish" phase - the indices fell by more than 20%. After the value of shares and the capitalization of companies decreased, the record multipliers “blew off” as well. All this led to the fact that experts began to admit that the market is now approaching its "fair" assessment.

This, in particular, says ["Rule 20"](https://www.familybusinessmagazine.com/stock-valuations-and-%E2%80%9Crule-20%E2%80%9D#:~:text=In%20other%20words%2C%20the%20Rule,the%20inflation%20rate%20equals%2020.&text=The%20stock%20market%20is%20deemed,the%20sum%20is%20above%2020.) . It states that the market's "fair" valuation is at 20 minus inflation expectations. The current ten-year inflation expectations in the US are 2.7%. When subtracting from 20 the inflation forecast of 2.7%, we [get](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-05-20/how-far-will-stocks-and-the-s-p-500-index-fall-in-2022) 17.3.

The P/E for the broader S&P 500 is now at the same level. This confirms the "Rule of 20" and signals that the stock has reached a "fair" [valuation](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-05-20/how-far-will-stocks-and-the-s-p-500-index-fall-in-2022) .

**"Rule of 20": P/E + inflation = 20**

The stock market is considered undervalued when the amount is less than 20 and overvalued when it is greater than 20.

However, Morningstar analysts [believe](https://www.morningstar.com/articles/1094634/the-market-is-undervalued-but-concentrated) that the US stock market is now trading at a 15% discount to the "fair" value, according to the agency's experts. The reason for this, they believe, is the undervaluation of large-cap companies from the FAANG group, which fell sharply along with the rest of the market.

{{< ads >}}

According to Morningstar analysts, such a market provides long-term investors with an opportunity to invest in these "high-quality growth stocks with significant competitive valuation advantages that are closer to value stocks and provide a significant margin of safety compared to their intrinsic value."

Although the market is currently undervalued according to Morningstar, analysts expect the current volatility to continue over the next few months. The current [volatility](https://www.morningstar.com/articles/1094634/the-market-is-undervalued-but-concentrated)  is the result of a combination of four factors that are negatively affecting the markets:

*   slowdown in US economic growth;
*   tightening monetary policy;
*   high inflation;
*   growth in interest rates.

How fair is the US market: analysts' opinion
--------------------------------------------

According to CFA, Alexey Kornilov, Chief International Markets Analyst at Otkritie Investments Market Analysis Department, the argument that the US stock market is now approaching a “fair” valuation is sounding more and more justified. The historical value of the S&P 500 P/E multiple, which has long served as a good benchmark for investors, is around 16-17, he recalls.

“Currently, the market has come close to this level, which indicates the reasonableness of its assessment. Research shows that these levels of valuation correlate well with average historical returns from the market over the next ten years. In other words, at such levels, the market can be considered not much overvalued or undervalued, and this is important in terms of future expected returns,” says Alexey Kornilov.

{{< ads >}}

At the same time, the expert notes that the P/E multiple is the most simplified form of valuation.

“To complete the picture, it is necessary to take into account many other factors, such as projected growth rates, expected inflation, and so on. “Rule 20”, in fact, supplements this simple formula by taking into account the expected inflation and comes to the same conclusion,” notes Kornilov. This is a good starting point and a basis for some confidence among investors, but the foreseeable future for the market will largely depend on the actual dynamics of declining inflation, which remains well above 2.7%, and the "soft landing" of the US economy, says Kornilov.

According to Alor Broker analyst Andrey Eshkinin, the “fair” assessment of the market is much lower than it is now, and it has not finished falling yet.

“The fall of the S&P 500 is not over yet, the bottom should be expected in the region of 2700-3300 points. Two important factors will affect this: 1) the US Federal Reserve will start reducing its balance sheet by $47.5 billion a month from June 1, and will increase sales to $95 billion a month from September 1; 2) an increase in the key rate in the United States, which by the end of the year may reach 2.75–3% and will put additional pressure on business,” Andrey Eshkinin argues.

Although the volatility will continue, now is a great time to look for quality companies to buy, but you need to buy them with caution and with a small fraction of your portfolio, the analyst advises. “Before buying, you need to check two points: 1) the company must have a low debt load; 2) by multiples, the company should be worth less than its fair value. Only in this case, one or another company can be looked at for purchase, in other cases, investors should wait, ”Eshkinin says.

**Author:** *Karina Karimova*