---
title: "Don't get drunk at corporate parties: ex-CEO Cinnabon to young leaders"
description: Kat Cole was just 26 years old when she took over the international chain of Cinnabon bakeries. How reflection helps in business, why take on unusual tasks and what tests will help you choose the right employee - in a selection of her statements
date: 2022-06-06T02:36:01+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-06T02:36:01+08:00
images:
- k99rGDh.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Business Wire / AP'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel:
- business guru
tags:
---

Raise to your feet Cinnabon
---------------------------

When Kat Cole joined Cinnabon in 2010, the company's sales had been declining for six years. To remedy the situation, the leaders suggested reducing the calorie content of traditional buns and switching to artificial sweeteners and stabilizers. “This is not our model,” Cole was sure. Nobody eats cinnamon rolls every day. Our establishments are located where people do not often go, such as shopping malls and airports. We offer desserts that you can treat yourself to from time to time. That's the problem. A bun with sweeteners is no longer so tasty, but there are still a lot of kilocalories in it. ”

Cole suggested keeping the original recipe and allowing franchise owners to sell MiniBon buns, which are fist-sized and therefore lower in calories. Such a product already existed, but was sold in less than 15% of the network's outlets. Franchise owners were skeptical: the price of mini-buns is lower, which could reduce profits. Cole convinced executives to take the risk, and she was right: sales of the original buns barely declined, and overall chain sales rose 6%, largely due to the new product.

Cole also entered into partnerships with grocery stores and fast food restaurant chains Taco Bell and Burger King. During the first three years of its operation, Cinnabon opened 200 new bakeries and expanded the company's presence - its products were sold in 56 countries around the world. In 2013, the brand's revenue exceeded $1 billion, which was twice as much as in the year of Cole's arrival. “The brand really has unlimited potential, and my first four years with the company testify to this,” she is sure.

{{< ads >}}

Always say yes"
---------------

Prior to Cinnabon, Cole worked at the Hooters restaurant chain, where she rose from waitress to vice president in a short time. She connects her career rise with the fact that she was always ready for the new. “I answered yes to everything. Absolutely everything,” she recalled. Cole was always on the hook. She told how, before the arrival of the president of the company, she took on the task of cleaning the toilets. If the bartender did not leave because of her son's illness, she stood at the bar. If the chef quit, Cole would fry the wings herself. According to her, she was driven by curiosity, the desire to help people and not lose face.

As a result, when the company was choosing who to send to Australia to train the staff of the new chain restaurant, they chose it. "I said yes". I didn’t have a passport, I never flew a plane and never went abroad, but I still agreed, and then started to work hard, ”said Cole. Cole did it. She soon helped launch restaurants around the world, and by the age of 26 she was a vice president of Hooters.

According to the ex-head of Cinnabon, readiness for the new is a way to increase one's own potential, learn new things, and broaden one's horizons. “I had an insanely strong belief that anything is possible. I have always believed that opportunities push the boundaries, ”says Cole.

Why is reflection needed?
-------------------------

Cole believes that the ability to reflect plays an important role in career development and growth. To do this, you need to ask yourself questions: why is this happening, why did it work, how did I achieve this, why did I succeed? Reflection is what allows you to look at yourself through the eyes of other people. “Over the years, I have learned to question success much more than failure. I ask myself more questions when sales are up, not when they are down. You need to clearly understand why you succeed,” shared Cole.

It is reflection that helps to see the mistakes made, analyze their causes, work on them and develop as a person and professional.

She encourages leaders to admit their mistakes, as this helps to create a special corporate culture. “Be honest and open when you, as a leader, make mistakes and share what you have learned with the team,” Cole encourages. She believes that progress is blinding, which is why it is so important to keep abreast. “You need to break through the blindness of your own progress, you need to always maintain a sense of urgency, stick to your values ​​and maintain healthy motivation,” says Cole.

Reflection helps you see opportunities. “That's always been my thing: I can see opportunities in people and situations when others don't. So I help open the eyes of others, ”said Cole. In her opinion, if one person helps to reveal the potential of another, then he, in turn, will strive to help someone. The result is a domino effect. “So you can get a phenomenal trajectory along which you direct the whole world,” Cole is sure.

The former head of Cinnabon attaches great importance to criticism. “Whenever you are criticized, take a moment and assume that you were given the right remark. Assume for a moment that the person criticizing you is right,” Cole advises. This way you can think about the feedback, ask yourself additional questions instead of getting bogged down in a debate about who is right. This allows you to move on to a dialogue and search for a solution to the problem. In order to behave this way, she says, you need to be “humble and curious and understand that there is a lot to learn around you.”

{{< ads >}}

Choose the right people
-----------------------

Cole has developed her own approach to hiring over the course of her career. She says that the process begins even before the interview. “In the waiting area, the candidate is offered tea, coffee and water to see if he reacts, if he thanks,” Cole said.

Before entering Cole's office, there is a piece of paper on the floor between the door and the table. “I want to see if the person will pick it up. I don’t draw serious conclusions from this, but this way I can understand how attentive a person is to details, ”she says.

At the interview, Cole asks to talk about the closest person in life. Then she invites the applicant to name one trait of his character that the loved one does not like at all. This helps to understand how a person understands others and whether he sees his weaknesses.

Cole also finds it helpful to ask a candidate this type of question in an interview: fill in the blank: If it wasn't for \[the gap\], it would be difficult for me to succeed in my last position. Cole believes that such questions help the employer understand what resources are helping the candidate.

Kat Cole is the former chief operating officer of Focus Brands, which owns the Cinnabon bakery chain, and is the former head of the chain.

Born in 1978. She studied at the University of North Florida, but did not finish her studies, because she combined it with work in Hooters restaurants. In 2004, she became Vice President of Hooters. During her leadership, the network's revenue grew from $300 million to $1 billion.

She received her MBA from Georgia State University in 2010. In the same year, she moved to work at Cinnabon, in January 2011 she became president of the company. In 2013, the bakery chain's revenue exceeded $1 billion for the first time. In 2013, it was included in the Fortune 40 Under 40 rating.

Three More Executive Tips from Kat Cole
---------------------------------------

1.  **Listen to employees.** Leaders sometimes have to make tough decisions, and that takes a lot of time. “Usually there are a lot of people around who have long understood that this is the right decision,” Cole is sure. — The key task in business and leadership is to communicate with other people who know well what is happening. This way you will spend less time assessing the situation.”
2.  **Be grateful, but in moderation.** “Locking yourself in gratitude for what you already have can prevent you from dreaming big,” says Cole. She advises to always keep working on making the business even better even in moments of great success.
3.  **Do not remind colleagues that you are younger than them.** “If you lead and manage people who are at least a decade older than you, you need to dress professionally, speak professionally, and not get drunk at corporate events,” advises Cole. This approach allows you to cultivate respect and trust in the team.

_**Sources**: Cole interview for The Economist Walks into a Brothel by Allison Schrager, How I Got Here Podcast, Entrepreneur, New York Times, University of Pennsylvania Wharton School Business Journal, MarketerHire, Business Insider, Kat Cole's blog._