---
title: "Kathy Wood and WEF speakers predict an imminent recession. Is everything so bad"
description: The global economy could soon plunge into a deep recession, economists warn. Financial Times, The Economist and other media provide the most likely scenarios
date: 2022-05-30T00:45:27+08:00
lastmod: 2022-05-30T00:45:27+08:00
images:
- TMu8V4E.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Peter Macdiarmid / Getty Images'
authors:
- Kira Galkina
interest: investment
channel: 
- economic trends
tags: 
---

Perhaps the main topic of the economic forum held in Davos at the end of May was the threat of a global recession. It seemed that the global economy began to gradually recover from the blow dealt to it by the COVID-19 pandemic. But now growth is under threat from new challenges. “Now we are again scared of a global recession, only this time for real,” [says](https://www.ft.com/content/35b31fb0-f8ad-4557-9d95-267e0ed958eb) Robin Brooks, chief economist at the Institute of International Finance.

Tough measures to combat a new wave of COVID-19 in China, the inability of the US Federal Reserve System (Fed) to cope with inflation, the growth of daily expenses of European households, the threat of starvation in poor countries - the combination of these and other factors is causing concern to officials and economists.

“Many of the conversations in Davos boiled down to the question: how do you assess the likelihood of a recession? Let's say 50/50," Bill Winters, CEO of the financial corporation Standard Chartered Bank , [quoted the BBC as saying.](https://www.bbc.com/news/business-61564181)

Even at the beginning of the session at the forum, the host asked the audience which of the participants considered the threat to be real. Most of the congregation raised their hands.

The extent to which the most negative scenario is possible can already be judged by a number of factors.

[According to](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/05/davos-2022-global-economic-outlook-is-a-recession-inevitable/) David M. Rubenstein, co-founder and co-chairman of Carlyle Group management company, the situation does not appear to be as favorable as one would like. At a forum in Davos, he suggested that "the recession may not be so far away." When asked about the current situation in Europe and whether it will lead to a recession, Jane Fraser, chief executive officer of investment bank Citi, answered succinctly “yes”.

World Bank President David Malpass also believes that the global economy is facing the threat of recession. “It is not yet possible to understand how we will be able to avoid this,” he [notes](https://www.reuters.com/markets/europe/world-banks-malpass-says-war-ukraine-may-trigger-global-recession-2022-05-25/) .

The likelihood of a recession in Europe, the United States and China is high and continues to increase, writes The Guardian. “A collapse in one region will increase the chances of a collapse in others,” [warns](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2022/apr/28/risk-of-recession-in-europe-us-and-china-is-rising-by-the-day) Kenneth Rogoff, professor of economics and public policy at Harvard University (he was also chief economist at the International Monetary Fund from 2001 to 2003). “Record high inflation does not make things any easier. I'm not sure that politicians will be up to the task they may soon face."

A similar point of view is [shared](https://quote.rbc.ru/news/short_article/627b75799a79478098d0d659) by ARK Innovation founder Cathy Wood. In her opinion, alarming data from China and Europe point to the risk of a global recession, although some progress has been made in the field of inflation.

{{< ads >}}

Anxiety builds
--------------

Most economists are alarmed by the problems of China's economy, which accounts for 19% of the world's total output. The quarantine measures imposed by Beijing due to the new wave of COVID-19 have affected global supply chains and demand for goods and services from other countries. In April 2022, retail sales in China collapsed 11% year-on-year, while industrial production fell 3%. At the same time, home sales are falling and unemployment is rising.

The American economy, in its own way, is suffering from the consequences of the measures taken during the coronavirus pandemic. It is possible that too much support from the state led to an overheating of the economy and provoked high inflation, even with a moderate increase in energy prices. The US Federal Reserve, which acts as the country's central bank, has already moved into a phase of tightening monetary policy in order to slow down the growth of the economy and consumer prices. US Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said the regulator will continue to raise interest rates until it sees "clear and convincing" evidence that inflation is returning to the 2% target. It will be difficult to bring inflation under control without a recession and a significant increase in unemployment, according to Krishna Guhi, vice chairman of consulting firm Evercore ISI.

In Europe, the rise in consumer prices is driven by rising energy prices, not by an overheating economy, and can be directly linked to Russia's military operation in Ukraine. Unfortunately, understanding the causes of European troubles does not reduce their consequences, writes The Financial Times. With inflation at 7.4%, prices in the eurozone in April 2022 are growing much faster than the incomes of citizens. This negatively impacts people's livelihoods, limits spending and slows post-pandemic recovery. According to Christian Schulz, an economist at Citi investment bank, until the end of 2022, “growth is likely to be almost non-existent.”

Poorer emerging markets face an even greater challenge. Governments need to cope with rapidly rising food prices, which account for more than 30% of budget spending. Fears that a food crisis could break out at the end of 2022 are growing with the closure of the Black Sea ports that Ukraine uses to export grain. UN Secretary-General António Guterres advocated an end to the conflict amid fears of rising prices and that tens of millions of people could face food insecurity, "followed by malnutrition and mass starvation."

At the Davos forum, Kristalina Georgieva, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), also noted that concerns about access to affordable food around the world are "going wild".

After the start of a special military operation, there are serious interruptions in the supply of wheat and sunflower oil. The supply crisis is expected to last until 2023. Participants in the Davos forum fear that supply disruptions are part of Russia's deliberate strategy to test the endurance of the international community, and thus, in the words of one of the bankers, "hunger is being turned into a weapon."

{{< ads >}}

Not everything is lost
----------------------

According to the IMF and the World Bank, it is still premature to talk about a global recession (both organizations characterize it as a one-year period during which the average citizen of the world experiences a drop in real incomes). At the same time, in April 2022, the IMF [worsened](https://www.ft.com/content/35b31fb0-f8ad-4557-9d95-267e0ed958eb) its forecast for growth during 2022 to 2.5% (in October 2021 it was assumed that it would be 4.5%).

According to the World Trade Organization (WTO), global economic growth will decline to 2.8% in 2022 (prior to the start of the Russian military operation, growth was forecast at 4.1%). [Research and consulting company WoodMac estimates](https://tribune.com.pk/article/97575/are-we-on-the-brink-of-a-global-recession) that the global economy will grow by 2.5% in 2022 and 0.7% in 2023.

Most economists believe that the measures taken by governments will avoid a recession in 2022. According to Innes McPhee, an economist at Oxford Economics, policymakers still have tools to maneuver if the situation worsens. “The risks of a recession will increase next year, but now they are not so high,” he believes.

In addition, there are other signs that pessimism is not always justified. In the US, retail sales and hotel occupancy are on the rise. The number of bookings made through the restaurant reservation service OpenTable is still higher than before the COVID-19 pandemic. The UK's Office for National Statistics and the Bank of England estimate that Britons have not abstained from social activity or abandoned purchases that could be postponed either.

Even with a decline in purchasing power, consumers are likely to be able to continue spending for a while. Households in countries that are members of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) have a total of $4 trillion in savings (or 8% of GDP) accumulated during the pandemic. In the US, low-income households had more money in their bank accounts at the end of 2021 than in 2019.

Businesses are also feeling pretty confident, although rising costs are weighing on individual retailers' bottom line, The Economist [writes .](https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/05/15/global-growth-is-slowing-but-not-stopping-yet) However, the OECD's business confidence indicator is holding steady, and data from the job site Indeed shows that there are enough job openings in wealthy countries (although it has stopped growing). People's interest in investing remains: JPMorgan Chase analysts estimate that in the first three months of 2022, global capital investment increased by 7.6% compared to the same period in 2021.

At the same time, the aviation industry is rapidly recovering, which was hit by a decline in the number of flights during the pandemic. “At almost every airline, I have been told of significant growth, especially in the summer of 2022 and especially in the tourism sector,” says Hassan El-Khoury, CEO of aviation services provider National Aviation Services. [In his opinion](https://globalnews.ca/news/8868937/davos-global-financial-crisis-concerns-world-economic-forum/), by the end of 2022 or by the middle of 2023, the aviation industry will return to the indicators that were before COVID-19.

{{< ads >}}

Word with the letter "r"
------------------------

As the risks of a global recession rise, the best news for the global economy would be to resolve the conflict in Ukraine and abandon the “zero tolerance” strategy in the fight against COVID-19 in China, writes The Financial Times. However, this is beyond the competence of the ministers of economy and other officials, so they can only rely on the tools available to them to solve such problems.

In European and emerging market economies, such measures to mitigate the effects of rising food and energy prices could include increased benefits and subsidies for the purchase of food and energy.

The situation could still turn for the worse if Russia cuts off gas supplies to Europe, China tightens quarantine restrictions, or central banks are forced to raise interest rates faster than planned. But so far, the 12th global recession since 1900 does not appear to have begun yet, [writes](https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/05/15/global-growth-is-slowing-but-not-stopping-yet) The Economist.

Experts from The Conference Board research group also do not believe that the global economy will fall into a recession in 2022 or 2023. But they admit that the Russian military operation will affect economic growth, causing a recession in Russia, Ukraine and possibly other regions.“In 2021, the economy grew by 5.9%. In 2022, growth has slowed down and may reach 2.9%. This is 1 percentage point less than expected in February 2022,” [predict](https://www.conference-board.org/topics/geopolitics/GEO-May22) analysts.

The current economic crisis will not be like the previous shocks that the world has experienced in the past 25 years, David Rubenstein [said](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/05/davos-2022-global-economic-outlook-is-a-recession-inevitable/) at a forum in Davos. It will not be a “dot-com bubble” (which was caused by active trading in overvalued shares of IT companies and startups), a financial crisis or a pandemic. Rubenstein recalled an anecdote from the time when Jimmy Carter was President of the United States (1977-1981). At the time, Alfred Kahn, an inflation adviser, was advised not to use the R-word (recession) because it "scares people," and he changed it to "banana." Rubenstein suggested that if the "banana" happens now, "it will be soft."

Markets on the lookout
----------------------

Investors in the stock markets consider a recession almost inevitable. In mid-May 2022, the MSCI global stock index continued to decline, retracing 18% from its peaks in early 2022. It's not just equities that are having a hard time, as investors are selling off bonds, inflation-protected securities, industrial metals, gold and crypto assets, according to Dhawal Joshi, chief strategist at BCA Research. “The last time a massive sell-off of various types of assets occurred in early 1981, when the Paul Volcker Fed broke the back of inflation and turned stagflation into a real recession,” Joshi recalls.

Some bidders are still cautiously optimistic, believing that the recession is a short-term phenomenon, writes Barron's. They expect inflation to start to ease over the next few months and the US Federal Reserve to ease policy in turn. Adherents of this point of view point to a stable situation in the labor market (the number of applications for unemployment benefits fluctuates near the lowest levels in ten years).

Other investors are confident that a recession is coming. The research firm Wolfe Research believes that the situation is not in favor of the US Federal Reserve, and inflation, which is already approaching its highest level in a decade, will only increase in subsequent quarters. In addition, it is increasingly spreading to all sectors of the economy, analysts of the company point out. [According to their forecasts](https://www.barrons.com/articles/stock-market-recession-inflation-federal-reserve-51653328257) , this creates a vicious circle that will keep prices high after the end of 2022. This could force the Fed to tighten policy more and for a longer period than Wall Street hopes.

"There's a lot of talk about a recession as markets play out a series of rate hikes," said Danny Hewson, an analyst at investment firm AJ Bell. “Central banks are still under pressure to help people get out of the crisis they are in.”

However, the situation on the stock exchanges does not always accurately reflect what is happening in the economy. As Nobel laureate economist and professor Paul Samuelson once said, “The stock market has predicted nine of the last five recessions.” Deloitte, a consulting firm, offers several explanations for why stock prices are falling. One is that prices were too high from the start and showed signs of a speculative bubble (they usually burst only after a change in monetary policy).

Another reason Deloitte believes is the very tightening of monetary policy. When interest rates rise, the rate at which expected earnings are discounted increases, which leads to lower stock prices, analysts say.

“The reality is that there is a 100% chance of another recession in the future. The question is how soon this will happen,”  Deloitte experts [write .](https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/economy/global-economic-outlook/weekly-update.html) They point out that most forecasts assume a low chance of a recession in 2022 or even 2023.

_Sources: The Financial Times, The Economist, BBC, Barron's, The [Associated Press](http://www.ap.org/) , [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/) , Deloitte, Express, The Conference Board, The Guardian, The Tribune_

**Author:** *Kira Galkina*