---
title: "Can chain giant Walmart rise from its fall?"
description: After a record drop to $119 in May on the back of weak reporting from US retailer Walmart, the company's shares are starting to gradually recover. What is happening with the retail giant and what investors can expect in the near future.
date: 2022-06-06T10:55:17+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-06T10:55:17+08:00
images:
- I32zqpC.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Chris Hondros / Getty Images'
authors:
- r-insight
interest: investments
channel: 
- shares
tags: 
- financial freedom
---

Walmart is an American retailer founded in 1962. Today it is the largest retail chain in the world with a capitalization of $423.629 billion. The retailer has more than 5 thousand stores in 23 countries around the world - mainly in Mexico and Canada, as well as in South Africa, China, Japan and a number of South American countries. About 4.5 thousand network points operate in the USA. At the end of 2021, the company earned 69% of its revenue in its home market and only 17% abroad. Today, Walmart is expanding its presence in the home market by actively developing delivery services.

The decrease in the retailer's financial performance in the first quarter of this year is due to both the general situation in the US economy and the effect of the high base of previous reporting periods (over the past two years, the company's profit has steadily increased).

Leadership in the retail market
-------------------------------

Due to its size and wide logistics system, Walmart maintains some of the lowest prices for groceries. In the context of the pandemic, the retailer has stepped up the development of online trading and began to successfully compete with the largest players in this sector. With record U.S. inflation in recent months, shoppers are increasingly choosing Walmart.

The growth in popularity of the chain was evidenced by the increase in its revenue for the first quarter of 2022 by 2.36% y / y, to $141.6 billion, while the consensus of analysts from Wall Street expected a result of $138.83 billion. raised its sales growth forecast for the current year from 3% to 4%.

{{< ads >}}

Activities
----------

Last year, under the impact of the pandemic, Walmart closed a number of underperforming stores outside the United States. In the first quarter of this year, International segment revenue decreased by 13% yoy to $23.8 billion. At the same time, the company is increasing its presence in the United States, where its revenue rose by 4% yoy from January to March, to $96.9 billion. The retailer is developing Sam's Club, a chain of self-service stores named after Walmart founder Sam Walton. In this segment, in the first quarter of this year, revenue amounted to $19.6 billion, LFL sales increased by 10.2% yoy. The online segment's revenue for the same period rose only 1%, but over the previous two years it increased by 38%.

New profit growth points
------------------------

Walmart President and CEO Doug McMillon believes that the retailer is adapting to the new economic realities by balancing the interests of buyers with the need to ensure profit growth. Walmart CFO Brett Biggs announces expansion of Walmart network in the US. By the end of 2022, it is planned to expand the express delivery network using drones together with the DroneUP operator. The new service will be available to 4 million US households, further boosting revenue from the US segment and offsetting losses from the International segment.

{{< ads >}}

US GAAP results
---------------

Walmart's net assets in the first quarter of 2022 decreased from last year's $83.253 billion to $76.896 billion, mainly due to a decrease in the indicator from the International segment. Nevertheless, the company retains leadership in the Consumer Staples sector in terms of capitalization ($423.629 billion) and assets ($246.142 billion). And with a dividend increase from $0.55 per share in 2021 to $0.56 per share in 2022, Walmart is still undervalued by the market. For the first quarter of 2022, the retailer carried out a buyback in the amount of $2.4 billion, and during the year it plans to increase the buy back program, which will provide the issuer's quotes with an additional growth driver.

Walmart is a reliable asset for portfolio diversification
---------------------------------------------------------

Walmart is expanding its presence in the home market by actively developing delivery services. The decrease in the retailer's financial performance in the first quarter of this year is due to both the general situation in the US economy and the effect of the high base of previous reporting periods (over the past two years, the company's profit has steadily increased).

Walmart's business is weakly dependent on external factors, so a possible economic downturn will not put significant pressure on the company's results, and it will maintain its leadership in its segment. Over a one to two year horizon, we expect Walmart's quotes to return to the range of $153-155 per share.