---
title: "Do not rush. What crypto investors need to know about the HODL strategy"
description: The HODL strategy is similar to buy-and-hold in the stock market. If you are ready to buy tokens and forget about them for a couple of years, your patience will be rewarded. Here are some tips from Binance on how to make money on HODL and what pitfalls to avoid.
date: 2022-06-06T11:50:39+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-06T12:50:39+08:00
images:
- VZPrXcw.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Harrison Kugler / Unsplash'
authors:
- binance
interest: investments
channel: 
- shares
tags: 
---

In 2009, Norwegian Christopher Koch bought 5,000 bitcoins at $27 and only remembered about the purchase in 2013. Then the price of bitcoin reached $266. By selling bitcoin for fiat, just a fifth of his digital savings, Koch was able to buy a three-room apartment in an upscale Oslo neighborhood.

HODL is one of the strategies for working with cryptocurrencies. Hodlers buy crypto and hold it for a long time, not paying attention to market fluctuations. They just forget about their deposits for a few years and wake up rich.

In fact, the buy-and-hold strategy in the stock market is an analogue of the HODL strategy. While most speculators are preoccupied with chasing exchange rates, long-term investors are investing in the future of companies. Warren Buffett also prefers this strategy. In 1988, Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway purchased 14 million shares of Coca-Cola for $600 million. Since the beginning of 1988, Coca-Cola's share price has risen 2,000%.

The word HODL itself is a misspelled hold that has gained notoriety and has become part of crypto slang. Later, HODL became a backronym, which stands for Hold on for Dear Life and means "keep on with your last strength." CZ himself, the founder and CEO of Binance, says he only found out about this a week ago. Consider one of the most common and well-known - the HODL strategy.

{{< ads >}}

Why Hodlers Make Money
----------------------

There are many factors that affect the value of cryptocurrencies. In the report Analyzing the Primary Value Drivers of Leading Cryptocurrencies, study authors Philipp Rosenbach, an investment banking analyst at Alantra, and Robert Richter, a research fellow at the Frankfurt Blockchain Center, were able to identify a total of 19 factors that affect the value of digital currencies. Among the most important are the exchange balance, the volume of transactions, the exchange rate in dollars and the outflow of exchange capital.

The value of a bitcoin is primarily determined by the ratio of the total amount of BTC available to newly generated coins. Some cryptocurrencies, such as Stellar and BNB, have to be “burned” in order to prevent too much circulating supply and slow down inflation. When burned, the token is sent to an unrecoverable address on the blockchain.

The price of a crypto is also affected by its adoption. In the summer of 2021, Bitcoin became the official currency of El Salvador. And PayPal, Shopify, Rakuten, PureVPN, and many others have added bitcoin to the list of currencies that can be used to pay for their services.

The cryptocurrency market is developing rapidly, attracting the attention of large companies. Intel enters the bitcoin mining industry with plans to introduce a bitcoin mining chip, about 300 banks plan to launch bitcoin trading in the first half of 2022. Microsoft has acquired Activision, the world's leading game developer, with an active interest in the Metaverse virtual space. And Instagram plans to soon integrate NFT technology, which will allow users to share their NFT with the audience by connecting a crypto wallet.

How long does it take to walk?
------------------------------

Anjali Jariwala, Certified Financial Planner, Chartered Accountant, and founder of Fit Advisors, recommends holding bitcoins for at least ten years.

**Advantages of the HODL strategy**

*   You save nerves, time and healthy sleep. You do not have to spend time constantly monitoring quotes and forecasts, but simply wait patiently.
*   Suitable for beginners. You do not need to understand trading. With patience, you will still be in the black in a few years.
*   You do not pay extra fees for transactions.

**Cons of the HODL strategy**

*   Assets may depreciate. The cryptocurrency market is growing, but some digital money may simply disappear. According to Coinopsy, there are over 2,000 dead currencies on the market right now.
*   There is a danger of investing in a Ponzi scheme. There are cases when a project is created to attract investment, and then goes bankrupt or disappears altogether.
*   By not following the market, you may miss the right time to sell.
*   Risk control. When the rate drops too low, traders minimize the risks with the help of a stop loss - the automatic sale of assets. Hodlers don't have that option.

{{< ads >}}

The best way to track the HODL strategy is through the actions of “whales” – large holders of cryptocurrencies. As of June 28, 2021, 34 public companies collectively own over 213,000 bitcoins, according to CryptoTreasuries. Together, they represent 1.14% of the total Bitcoin in circulation and are equivalent to $7.4 billion based on the June 28, 2021 price.

Tips for beginner hodlers
-------------------------

If you are ready to buy tokens and forget about them for a couple of years, your patience will be rewarded. Here are some tips on how you can make money on hodle:

1.  Reduce market noise. Daily monitoring of quotes only increases anxiety. Having chosen a long-term investment strategy, try not to pay attention to daily fluctuations in quotes. Study the dynamics of the development of the token over the past year or two. This will help to better understand its long-term perspective.
2.  Buy with free money. Invest an amount that you will not need in the near future and the loss of which will not be noticeable to you.
3.  Buy with bears. Choose the best time to buy by entering the market during a downturn.
4.  Study each crypto asset in detail. Kiana Danial, author of Crypto Investing for Dummies, began tracking crypto markets in 2016 and investing in late 2018. Danial believes awareness is the best strategy.
5.  Start small. Deciding to buy bitcoin can be tricky. Therefore, you can start small and buy a part of it - Satoshi. Anthony Pompliano, co-founder of cryptocurrency hedge fund Morgan Creek Digital and bitcoin investor, says that even if you start with a small investment, you will gain experience and learn more about it.
6.  Remember the 1%. Financial analysts recommend not investing more than 1% percent of their assets in high-risk assets, which include cryptocurrencies. The remaining 99% is recommended to diversify by investing in other investment instruments.