---
title: "How to make product cards on the marketplace so that everyone is sold out: a guide"
description: Entrepreneurs still shoot their product for marketplaces with a bad camera, not caring about the angle. And they are surprised that sales do not go. How to win in a competitive online race thanks to an impressive visual - in the detailed Demis Group guide
date: 2022-06-09T12:35:01+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T16:35:01+08:00
images:
- 29VCqRS.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Cindy Ord/Getty Images'
authors:
- Ekaterina Popova
interest: marketing and advertising
channel: 
- internet marketing
- instructions
tags: 
---

The blocking of popular social networks, which were the main drivers of online sales and advertising for many entrepreneurs, led to their migration to marketplaces. The competition there has seriously grown, and it has become especially important to stand out from the crowd with the help of a visual.

So images or videos have become the main tools of competition. They not only increase the attractiveness of the product, but also act as the most important trigger for making a decision, because the user does not have the opportunity to contact the product live. Therefore, the design of product cards on platforms becomes critical.

A product card is a product page on the marketplace that contains product information, photos, a price description, and a Buy button. You can use photos, infographics, and videos to basicly issue a card on an online platform. As a rule, manufacturers place their products on several marketplaces at once, so it is important to form a clear TOR for images. It should include the following items:

*   how much material is needed
*   in what format
*   for which sites.

This will help to avoid a chaotic and unattractive visual when you first enter the site.

Let's take a closer look at each of the content formats for presenting your product.

Photo
-----

When preparing for a shoot, keep in mind the requirements for photo marketplaces where you will sell: they are often different. Estimate the total amount of material you need and write down clear image sizes for each online platform in order to immediately prepare the desired visual package.

Let's describe the basic requirements for a photo.

**High quality.** Each marketplace may have its own requirements for uploading files. Use shots from different angles and take enlarged photos of important details that will help the buyer better understand your product. The image should immediately show what size and texture the object has, what materials are used, etc. Give the buyer the opportunity to enlarge the photo to see the details.

{{<ads>}}

Requirements for uploading photos to Wildberries:

*   JPG or PNG format;
*   aspect ratio - 3:4 (vertical image);
*   resolution - at least 900 × 1200 pixels;
*   the maximum size of one of the sides is no more than 8000 pixels;
*   image resolution - from 72 pixels per inch;
*   standard color profile: sRGB IEC 61966-2.1.

Requirements for uploading photos to Ozon:

*   JPEG or PNG format;
*   resolution - from 200 to 10,000 pixels on each side;
*   size - no more than 10 Mb;
*   the background is white or light. For white or transparent products, a black background is acceptable. For the clothing, footwear and accessories category, the background is gray (#f2f3f5).

**Real photos.** It is extremely important to use a photo of exactly your product so that the buyer’s expectations coincide with reality, there is no disappointment, refusal to purchase and a bad rating. You can take the pictures yourself or hire a professional (which is of course more preferable if your budget allows). If you decide to take a photo yourself, pay attention to four factors.

**Equipment.** Pictures should be taken on a high-quality camera - it is better to use a professional camera or a smartphone with good optics. Flagship cameras may well be the way to go if you're on a budget. It is advisable to use a tripod to avoid blurry shots, to be able to shoot the product from different angles at the same distance, or to use a slow shutter speed.

**Light.** It is best to take photos in daylight. It should be enough, but not too much, so as not to light up the product. Of course, there are special home lamps that can be used to create an interesting effect, more artistic photography, highlight the product from different angles, but still they are inferior to high-quality natural light.

**Background.** You need to choose a background that will not distract from the product. If this is a small product (cosmetics, phone case, hair accessories), you can create a mini-studio. A fabric or paper backing on the wall and a base backing in a neutral, soft color will suffice. Now on sale there are many ready-made solutions for these purposes. If the product is intended for outdoor use or has large dimensions, you can shoot in a natural environment.

**Composition.** It is worth studying the rules of its construction before shooting. An interesting and well-composed composition attracts more attention. Below are a few tricks for creating a fun-filled composition:

*   The rule of thirds. Visually, the frame is divided into 9 rectangles: 3 rows and 3 columns. The object must be located at their intersection. Many cameras have the ability to display a grid with this division.
*   Odd number rule. An even number of objects in the frame are easily grouped, and therefore seem boring, while an odd number arouses interest on a subconscious level.
*   Angle play. Photos taken at an angle of 45 or 90 degrees are the most natural and familiar to the eye. If you take a picture from above, it will look more interesting. Suitable for subject photography of small objects.
*   Additional components. You can place additional objects in the frame that will emphasize the properties of the product. It is important that they correspond to the topic, for example, be present in the composition.

**Product in action.** Due to the fact that the user cannot touch, try on or check the product before buying, it is important to include at least one photo in action in the carousel. If it is clothing, shoes or an accessory, then show how the product looks on a person. If this is any equipment, sports or country, then demonstrate it in the process of use. A photo in action helps to convey the right atmosphere and philosophy of a product or brand.

{{<ads>}}

Infographics
------------

Infographics is the addition of design to product photos. May be accompanied by tables, diagrams, descriptions of key features and benefits. An important rule of quality infographics is not to use a lot of text in an attempt to fit all the information in one image. You can make the cover infographic or dilute the product photo with it.

Benefits of infographics:

*   To attract attention. Adding design to the photo helps to stand out from the competition, immediately declare the merits.
*   Ease of perception. It is easier for the brain to process visual information than text.
*   Quick demonstration of benefits. The user on the first screen sees the beneficial properties of the product without reading the text description. This saves time and helps convey information faster, stimulating purchases.

**Rules and restrictions**

Minimum text. There is a 5/5 rule. Select up to five items to place as text on the image. Each of them should consist of no more than five words.

Icons. Accompany the text with additional symbols or images to make the information easier to understand.

Minimum colors and fonts. The basic rule of any design, including infographics. Choose one or two colors and one font for the text. Colors should match the theme, color scheme, overall composition, and be pleasing to the eye. Fonts should be legible both at a small size and when enlarged.

Product in the foreground. Text, icons, color schemes should not draw attention to themselves from the product itself. These elements must be complementary.

Air. In the picture, all elements should “breathe easily”, that is, each of them should be given enough space. So the image will not look overloaded, which means it will be easy to read.

Quality picture. The resulting file must be high enough resolution to be viewed on a variety of displays.

{{<ads>}}

**Elements to add to infographics**

Not all information is suitable for placement on such images. We list the one that will be useful to the user:

*   Product benefits. You can show how your product is better than a competitor's product, what benefits it gives to the buyer.
*   Product characteristics. You can visualize the main parameters of the product (dimensions, composition, properties), which will allow the user to immediately understand the product without reading the description, which, as a rule, is not located on the first scroll screen.
*   Size table. You can place a table with a dimensional grid or make a diagram for the correct measurement of parameters. Suitable for clothes and shoes.
*   Completeness. You can create a separate image indicating the quantity and composition of the goods in the kit.
*   Instruction. If the product is technically complex or just needs additional description of how to use it, you can give a hint in the form of an infographic. It is important to follow the 5/5 rule and use only the main points. Detailed instructions are best attached directly to the product.

Videos
------

The third format for designing a product card is video. Most users prefer to watch product videos rather than looking at photos or reading descriptions. And so that they do not have to additionally search for content on other sites, we can provide a video for review right on the product page.

**Formats**

There are several options to look out for. It is not recommended to come up with new ones, because it is more convenient for the user to consume familiar content.

{{<ads>}}

1.  Review or testing. Often used to sell electronics. Not suitable if you have a very simple product that has nothing to break or unique advantages.
2.  Demonstration of possibilities. A universal solution for any category of goods.
3.  Presentation commercial. Valid for any product. Helps to stand out from competitors through advertising images, creative presentation of benefits.
4.  Unpacking with an overview of the package. Suitable for complex electronics and complete products. Not applicable if you don't have packaging or it's simple enough. This video can show not only the product itself, but also reliable packaging.
5.  Video instruction. Relevant for technically complex products that have difficulties with connection (reverse osmosis water filters) or operation (robot vacuum cleaner with many functions).
6.  Manufacturing process. The format is well suited for food, electronics, etc. Helps to emphasize strengths: naturalness, build quality.

**Training**

A selling video is impossible without preliminary study. Important:

*   Consider a scenario. Information should be presented in a logical and consistent manner in accordance with the pains of consumers.
*   Consider visuals. The essence of the video should be clear when viewed without sound, so use visuals that match the voice acting. This approach will increase the number of sales and speed up decision making: the buyer will not need to look for a suitable place or headphones to watch the video with sound.
*   Monitor high quality video. Almost everyone has a fast internet connection and a high resolution display, so it's important that the content is of good quality or you run the risk of ruining the product experience. We recommend posting videos in resolutions from 1080×720 to 1920×1080.
*   Give preference to short videos and place in them the basic information the user needs to make a decision. A feature film is not required to describe a product. The buyer needs to be convinced in a very limited amount of time, as long as he has an interest in the product. Therefore, the recommended duration of the video is limited to two minutes, and the optimal time is from seven seconds to one minute.

**Author:** *Ekaterina Popova, UX, web designer Demis Group*