---
title: "Tax nuances: what you need to keep in mind when starting a business in Armenia"
description: 'Armenia has become one of the areas of business development most suitable for Russians. And she is ready for cooperation: opening a company here is quick and easy. But it is important to consider tax nuances. About them — CMS International BV experts'
date: 2022-06-03T19:49:54+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-03T19:49:54+08:00
images:
- xv03d3a.jpeg
caption: 'Photo: Maja Hitij / Getty Images'
authors:
- Hayk Safaryan
- Yulia Smurova
interest: finance
channel: 
tags: 
- CMS International
---

 has become one of the most attractive countries for the development of Russian business this year. What benefits does an employer get if he decides to scale his business on the territory of this state? And what tax nuances should be taken into account?

*   The Russian company can transfer workers to Armenia, maintaining labor relations with them. In this case, an employment contract on remote work is drawn up with them.
*   Having left the Russian Federation, the employee does not lose the status of a Russian tax resident. According to the current legislation, if labor activity is carried out outside our country, income from it is considered income received from sources outside the Russian Federation (even if the salary is paid by a Russian employer). Therefore, the income of a remote worker is subject to Russian personal income tax at 13% or 15% if income exceeds 5 million rubles, until the status of a tax resident of the Russian Federation is lost.
*   An employee who left for Armenia becomes a tax resident of this state as soon as he has lived in it for 183 days. Income tax in the republic is calculated at a rate of 21%, regardless of the amount of salary. From January 1, 2023, this rate will be reduced to 20%.

At the same time, it is known that there are plans to amend the Tax Code of the Russian Federation, which will lead to the fact that the income of a remote worker of a Russian enterprise in Armenia will be subject to Russian personal income tax even after losing the status of a tax resident of the Russian Federation (in this case, personal income tax will be withheld from a non-resident at an increased rate of 30% ).

Sole proprietorship, representative office or "daughter"
--------------------------------------------------------

Obtaining IP status in Armenia does not necessarily imply having IP status in Russia and vice versa. Registration of an individual entrepreneur in Armenia takes one working day from the date of submission of a complete package of documents. This form of doing business is the simplest and most inexpensive here. In addition, individual entrepreneurs, along with local Armenian companies, can enjoy special preferential tax regimes.

{{< ads >}}

It is also possible to open a representative office / branch of a Russian company or a subsidiary in Armenia (in this case, the founder of a new company can be both a Russian company and an individual). In this case, income tax will depend on the activities carried out by the representative office / branch, as well as on the applicable tax regime.

It is important to keep in mind that a subsidiary in Armenia may be recognized as a controlled foreign company (CFC). Which means that a shareholder (individual or legal entity - tax resident of the Russian Federation) will be required to report annually on CFC to the Russian tax authority.

Armenian legislation provides for three tax regimes:

1.  general tax regime (profit tax at a standard rate of 18% and VAT at a rate of 20%);
2.  special regime: turnover tax (rate varies from 1.5 to 5%) replaces income tax and VAT. Only small enterprises (companies or individual entrepreneurs) with an annual turnover of less than 115 million drams (approximately $240,000) can apply for a special regime.
3.  Special regime: micro-businesses (companies and individual entrepreneurs with an annual revenue of less than 24 million drams (approximately $50,000) also replace income tax and VAT.

Benefits for IT
---------------

Since 2015, the law “On assistance in the field of information technology” has been in force in Armenia, which provides for a number of benefits for participants in the IT field. The current regime is valid until December 31, 2022, but in practice this period is extended every three years.

{{< ads >}}

Thus, a newly registered IT business in Armenia has the opportunity to apply for an IT Start-Up certificate. Holders of such certificates are entitled to tax benefits. Including:

*   the income tax rate is reduced from 18% to 0%;
*   VAT is reduced from 20% to 0%;
*   the income tax rate is reduced from 21% to 10%.

To be certified, a company must meet the following criteria:

*   not created after the reorganization of another company;
*   is not a subsidiary or branch of a foreign organization;
*   no more than 30 people on staff;
*   the participants did not own an enterprise that was liquidated within the last three years;
*   the participants are not the owners of the enterprise that is undergoing bankruptcy proceedings;
*   participants with a share of more than 20% are not the owners of another IT company

Armenia also has a number of benefits for residents of special economic zones. Depending on the type of planned activity, an IT business in the republic can be registered in the FEZ "Alliance" or FEZ ECOS.

{{< ads >}}

A few more tax considerations
-----------------------------

**Only for newly opened companies**

The benefits mentioned above are not available for representative offices/branches of foreign (non-Armenian) companies. But they are available for a foreign citizen who opens a new company in the country.

**For real estate - an additional fee**

Living in Armenia, in addition to paying taxes on income from professional activities, employees will pay additional taxes if they purchase real estate in the country.

**Currency control**

Do not forget about the obligations of foreign exchange control. Citizens of the Russian Federation, Russian companies, foreign branches and representative offices of Russian companies are currency residents of the Russian Federation. This means that they are subject to restrictions and prohibitions on certain foreign exchange transactions provided for by foreign exchange legislation, as well as recent counter-sanction measures.

In practice, this means that every time a cross-border settlement is made, as well as when transactions are made through a foreign account opened outside the Russian Federation, a currency resident of the Russian Federation needs to check whether the operation is legal. If we are talking about settlements through a Russian account, a bank in Russia may not confirm the operation in case of doubts about its legality.

**Author:** *Hayk Safaryan, Tax Practice Partner at CMS International BV, Yulia Smurova, Senior Associate at CMS International BV*