---
title: 'The smell of reality: how startups are trying to "flavor" the metaverse'
description: "More and more startups are creating technologies to simulate smells in virtual reality: experts believe that those who succeed will be among the market leaders. However, previous attempts of this kind ended in failure."
date: 2022-06-04T09:04:52+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-04T09:04:52+08:00
images:
- Rtn0Pn8.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Tim P. Whitby / Getty Images'
authors:
- zara stone
- olga kiseleva
interest: management
channel: 
- world business trends
tags: 
- fast company
---

The long hallway of the San Francisco Museum of Crafts and Design, with walls painted pale blue, is lined with unusual devices. For example, a glass ball, which, with the help of trained bees, determines whether a person is sick by breathing. Or a small diffuser that sprays a scented substance at regular intervals, reminding dementia sufferers that it's time to eat. Also featured is a USB-powered silver necklace. When the wearer's pulse exceeds 110 beats per minute, it exudes a soothing fragrance. All of these items are part of the Living with Smell exhibition, the museum's first exhibition dedicated to the sense of smell and technology.

But of particular interest is, at first glance, an inconspicuous object - VR glasses. This headset has a secret - it connects to a white snap-on Bluetooth-enabled cartridge called ION. This is the flagship product of the American startup OVR Technology (short for olfactory virtual reality).

“It is very important that there is smell in the metaverse - without aromas, its potential is limited. Smell greatly influences who we are, how we feel, what we do, what we buy, who we love,” says OVR CEO Aaron Wisniewski.

There are nine chemical compounds in the ION cartridge. A special program allows you to mix them in different proportions and thus get hundreds of flavors.

Creating scents is a complex process. “Strawberry” or “chocolate” is easy to make, but “beach” requires a combination of sand, sea breeze and sunscreen. “Unfortunately, smells, unlike flowers, are not assigned codes,” Wisniewski laments. ION is compatible with the content of the Unity and Unreal development platforms thanks to a software plugin. The company plans to release a consumer version of the device in 2023.

“We would like our audience to be able to test the devices,” says museum communications director Sarah Beth Rosales. “People don’t always think about the smells around them, so it’s really important to showcase the scent.” But due to restrictions imposed in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, a practical demonstration of the new OVR was not possible.

{{< ads >}}

Thanks to olfactory neurons, people unconsciously respond to smell. For example, the scent of Japanese plum blossoms has been found to activate the sympathetic nervous system, resulting in improved mood and increased strength. To achieve the effect of complete immersion in the metaverse, smells are needed, because without them everything seems unreal.

This is not the first attempt to create a technology that can mimic various smells. In 1960, the Smell-O-Vision device was introduced, but it was not popular and did not take root on the market. For many years, the sense of smell was considered the least important of the senses. A 2018 survey found that 64% of British millennials would rather sacrifice their sense of smell than their smartphone.

But due to the impact of COVID-19 on the sense of smell, the situation has changed. Many people during the pandemic for the first time were able to appreciate how important the work of more than 400 human olfactory receptors. The smell evokes memories and has a psychological effect. In addition, there is an extremely strong relationship between smell and taste.

The moment of realizing the importance of smell coincided with the integration of multisensory technologies into everyday life. In 2021, Amazon patented an odor-recognition app for its Ring doorbells, and in 2019, the Google Brain Research Lab announced that it had developed a neural network to accurately assess odors at the molecular level.

Today, as engineers, designers and architects are actively shaping our digital future, smell has become a key piece of the puzzle. The one who is the first to manage to make fragrances part of the metaverse will be among the leaders, relegating to the background those who cannot do this.

OVR technology is already being used for medicinal purposes. Ascendant New York, a drug treatment clinic that costs $3,500 a day, is offering doctor-led meditations to patients. To do this, use the OVR platform called Inhale Wellness, which launched in November 2021. It helps recreate the experience of walking in nature. The device sprays aromatic substances in intervals with a duration of 0.1 ms. The choice of smell is determined by what the user sees in virtual reality.

At the University of Southern California Institute for Creative Technologies in Los Angeles, OVR cartridges are being used to work with veterans suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder as part of VR therapy. These flavors are very difficult to make. For example, to recreate the smoke from a weapon, it is necessary to reproduce sulfur dioxide, a toxic gas whose production is prohibited. “We are looking for a workaround using similar but safe molecules,” says Wisniewski. “The smell is a chaotic vinaigrette of molecules.”

OVR is just one of many start-ups specializing in technologies to mimic scents. Perhaps the most interesting scent-producing equipment in the metaverse is made in the laboratory of scientist Jas Brooks in Chicago. The Bluetooth device he created sits above the nasal septum and sends out tiny electrical impulses that stimulate the trigeminal nerve (the cranial nerve that provides sensation to the skin of the face, teeth, and tongue). So the device transmits information about the smell to the owner.

{{< ads >}}

British startup OW Smell Digital has raised $1.2 million to develop an artificial intelligence-based cloud service that is supposed to be a kind of “Photoshop for smells”. In Spain, Olorama Technology has put together a library of 400 fragrances (scents include "pastry", "mojito" and "wet earth"). They are stored in special diffusers, which can be activated using voice control. The company has also developed a kit to test the sense of smell during COVID-19: a set of 40 scents from Olorama costs from $13.4 thousand. spectroscopy.

The new companies were preceded by numerous startups that had already tried to do something similar, but did not succeed. Feelreal has raised money through crowdfunding to develop a multi-touch VR mask. It was introduced in 2015, but already in 2020 the company ceased to exist, disappointing investors. Tokyo-based Vaqso, which raised a $600,000 investment in 2017 to build a VR headset that mimics smells, hasn't updated its website in years.

"It's an interesting technology, but not a very interesting business model yet," says Christina Ku of NTT Docomo's Docomo Ventures. This company has implemented a digital smell in its own "virtual meeting room" Cokoon. According to Koo, the lack of major investment means that scent technologies are at a very early stage. But, she adds, big companies are intrigued. For example, the Japanese automaker Nissan has invested in developing technology to recreate the “smell of a new car” and hired certified “smell tasters”. “This is the next step,” she says.

However, Yash Patel, a general partner at blockchain investment firm Telstra Ventures, believes that smells in virtual reality are distracting from the big picture. “The development of the metaverse will not be dictated by additional hardware,” he says. According to him, compatibility with various platforms and devices comes first, then more advanced devices, and only after that there is a place for immersive add-ons.

Another player in the digital fragrance market is the American company Hypnos Virtual. It creates both hardware and software for it. The company has created an atomizer with flavors collected through a cold diffusion process to keep the ingredients pure. The software sets the parameters to mix them and then sprays them at a specific time selected by the company's "scent poets" or artificial intelligence. The company is also developing a fragrance editor, says CEO Michael Kaczkowski: imagine how much more immersive a vacation slideshow could be if you included sensory details. And then there was a hitch. In 2020, Kachkovsky, who also runs a company that makes prosthetics, artificial skin, eyes and limbs, came down with COVID-19. It seemed to him, that a stone block fell on him: he felt weak, his sense of smell was gone. “It was terrible,” he says. “I spent years and millions of dollars on this, and suddenly I stopped smelling.”

He was a little comforted by the fact that the human body, even devoid of smell, still physiologically (though not psychologically) reacts to smells, which means that Hypnos remained relevant from the point of view of medicine. This was especially true of cannabinoid cartridges, which contain smokeless tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (one of the main cannabinoids found in cannabis inflorescences and leaves). According to him, this area, tested by anesthesiologists, aroused the greatest interest among investors. Kaczkowski claims that by now his sense of smell has recovered by 80%.

{{< ads >}}

THC also opens up exciting opportunities for Hypnos Virtual cinemas “Imagine being able to regulate the euphoria while watching a movie,” Kaczkowski says. On the consumer side, the entrepreneur is working with high-end home theater designers to phase out the system at a cost of around $25,000. “The price will come down over time,” he adds.

Undoubtedly, the smell causes certain chemical and emotional reactions in a person. Many professional bowlers use scented balls because of the positive associations they evoke. But while we all inhale the same chemicals, our reactions are unique depending on our life experiences and memories. As the metaverse evolves, the only way to make it a mirror image of reality is to include smells from the start. Their absence may be more noticeable than their presence, and it must be in order to achieve the effect of complete immersion.

The Living with Scents exhibition also featured an interactive table with Ministry of Scent perfumes. The author of the article tested about 30 perfume ingredients, divided into top, middle and base notes, and circled his favorites on the sample sheet. There were also brown bottles with pipettes, and the author created his own fragrance from his favorite notes: a pinch of tea rose, chocolate and aquatica. But the resulting smell turned out to be moist, cloying, similar to the smell of powder, a wet dog and stale cookies at the same time.

Let's not forget that smell is also an art form, no matter how common it is. The Metaverse is mostly developed by software engineers who know their job well, but that doesn't include smells. Therefore, third-party experts are involved in the development of virtual reality, for example, fashion designers were hired to hold Fashion Week in the metaverse, and famous architects were hired to create cities. In this context, perhaps, the position of “smell director” will soon become especially popular.

**Author:** *Zara Stone, Olga Kiseleva*