---
title: "How to surely interest an investor: 12 stages of a successful presentation"
description: If you are looking for investments to start or scale your business, but don’t know how to surely generate interest in the project, then you need to participate in a pitch session. What is it and how to prepare for it - said Stanislav Zubov (Business Speech)
date: 2022-06-09T02:20:25+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T02:20:25+08:00
images:
- xeNZ95G.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Unsplash'
authors:
- Stanislav Zubov
interest: investments
channel: 
- venture industry and startups
- professional skills
- instructions
tags: 
---

A pitch session is a short presentation of a project to draw attention to an innovative product or technology, a small verbal and visual presentation of a business idea for a potential investor. Its goal is to arouse interest and create conditions for further communication with those who are interested.

A pitch is an improved short format, when an entrepreneur does not have the task of telling in as much detail as possible about an idea or project, but at the same time it is important to describe all its technical characteristics and features. All you need is a clear, necessary minimum of information, which will be enough for the right audience to pay attention and want to move on to the next step - discussing the details and conditions, getting acquainted with detailed calculations, and possibly closing a deal.

How to make such a presentation in the most effective way? Use a 12 step algorithm. It will help to create a clear structure of the presentation and achieve a positive reaction from the audience.

Here is Pitch Deck - a step by step presentation plan with comments.

{{<ads>}}

1\. Submission
--------------

An opening slide with a project logo and a description of the project in one line (in English terminology, this is called One Liner). This is necessary so that the target audience instantly understands the essence of the proposed idea.

_For example, you are introducing a new online communication program. The slogan could be: "Next generation conferencing environment."_

2\. Eyeliner
------------

A slide describing the current context and the opportunities associated with this context.

_This can be any useful data, such as what percentage of employees work remotely._

3\. Issues
----------

Description of the current needs and problems of the target audience of the project.

_Example: "Problems with functionality, stability and security."_

4\. Offer
---------

A slide about what an idea or product is. A short description in a language understandable to the listener with the necessary visualization.

_For example, as in the first case: “Video conferencing software that works equally stable on all devices.”_

5\. Benefits
------------

A description of the unique benefits of your offering and how you address the issues identified earlier.

_For example: "The ability to call a mobile phone from the program, strong data encryption, stable operation even with a weak Internet, and the ability to broadcast high-definition video."_

6\. Positioning
---------------

Comparison of the idea with competitors (of course, if it is in your favor). This item is optional, but it helps to understand the prospects in a competitive environment (and this is important for an investor).

_For example, show a pivot table showing that our product outperforms competing offerings in terms of stability, security, functionality, and price._

7\. Potential
-------------

A slide showing the size of the market the product plans to enter, and an indication of what percentage of this market it is planned to receive. This point is one of the most important for the investor, since it is important for him to quickly assess how much the game is worth the candle.

_Use a chart to show a growing market and provide information that you plan to gain a certain market share._

{{<ads>}}

8\. Plan of action
------------------

A slide showing the project's business model, explaining how the project will generate revenue.

_For example: "Paid subscription with an average check of_  _$_ _120 per year per account."_

Another slide in this part is the “road map”, which clearly shows what stages the project has already passed and what indicators it is moving towards within the specified time frame. This slide is important to show the investor the ambition and understanding of where and how the project will develop.

_For example: “2022 - the start of the project with an investment of 12 million. 2023 - the capture of 18% of the Russian market. 2024 - entering the international market with 100 million investments. 2025 - reaching 500 million annual profits._

9\. Offer
---------

This slide shows how much investment the project is looking for, where they will go and what the investor will receive in exchange for investments in the foreseeable future. It is important that the figures are fully consistent with the business model and the roadmap.

_For example: "65 million for marketing, development and operations with the prospect of generating 500 million in annual revenue in the future."_

10\. Confirmation
-----------------

A slide with the project team that will be the key to success. Here it is useful to indicate the achievements of the team members and their professional regalia. It is important for investors to understand who will manage their money. And at this point they are paying special attention.

{{<ads>}}

Another slide should show the real success of the project, positive feedback from users and clients, or the results of calculations and research.

_For example, logos of companies that plan to use your product._

11\. Summing up 
----------------

A slide that reiterates the key benefits of your offering. It is important to recall this at the end in order to consolidate the information that is useful for making a decision.

_For example: "Successful product, unique technologies, great prospects and profitable investment."_

12\. Appeal
-----------

The final slide offering to continue communication, ask questions or take action to further get to know you and the project. It is important to always be the initiator of the next step. This increases the likelihood that it will be committed.

_It can be a slide with contacts and a QR code in order to go to the site._

Less than five minutes
----------------------

Summing up, I would like to note that from the presentation, a potential investor in less than five minutes will learn that:

*   there is a great need for the product;
*   the product successfully solves actual problems;
*   there is a large market for expansion;
*   there is a clear scheme for making money;
*   professional team and positive customer experience;
*   You can learn more about the product in a convenient way.

This is what should be the trigger in order to make a decision and continue communication after the pitch.

**Author:** *Stanislav Zubov, expert in public speaking technologies and presentation creation at Business Speech*