---
title: "Why buying Peloton and Netflix shares is risky"
description: Investors often include in their portfolios stocks of companies that will never make a profit or will only if they keep pedaling forever. These include Netflix and Peloton. Sergey Belyaev (UFG Wealth Management) on why their business models are bad
date: 2022-06-09T02:07:19+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T02:07:19+08:00
images:
- oppehb7.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Peloton'
authors:
- Sergey Belyaev
interest: investment
channel: 
- venture industry and startups
- shares
tags: 
---

Since the beginning of 2022, the Nasdaq index has lost 28% and returned to the level of autumn 2020. Many are trying to predict how long the market correction will be, but we will not engage in speculation and fortune-telling, but will pay attention to the diversity of the technology sector. Companies from it can be divided into three groups:

*   companies with money that make money and accumulate cash on the balance sheet. Even if the economy slows down, these companies would rather lose some revenue than become unprofitable. This includes such giants as Microsoft, Google, Apple;
*   “bicycles” that are able to “feed” themselves only as long as their revenue grows. The clearest example is Netflix. With revenues of $32 billion, free cash flow is unlikely to exceed $700 million;
*   companies that are planned to be unprofitable and will remain so for several more years. Among them is the exercise bike manufacturer Peloton, which will remain operating unprofitable until 2025.

Let's take a closer look at the business models of these companies.

Companies with money
--------------------

Most of the truly profitable companies have been around for quite some time, during which they have rethought their business models. Apple has gradually transformed from a computer manufacturer to a creator of goods and cloud solutions for its ecosystem.

Microsoft's path was more rocky, but the company ended up becoming another cloud infrastructure leader (Microsoft Azure) and one of the most prominent beneficiaries of the subscription model (Office 365). It is these transformations and moving away from a single source of income that have allowed companies to develop, and sometimes from scratch, create new market segments that now help to consistently earn money. Another unique example of global monopolies is Google. The dominant position of the company as a search engine allows it to remain successful in selling advertising. However, Google does not leave attempts to develop new directions.

{{<ads>}}

In 2021, all three of these companies - Apple, Microsoft and Google - together earned $216 billion. They can buy up the US automotive market without even raising borrowed funds: the market capitalization of Ford, BMW and General Motors combined is $150 billion. of funds on the balance sheet of Microsoft, Google and Apple totals $212 billion. Given that companies usually have net debt on their balance sheets, in theory, these three can raise at least $600 billion in the debt market. That is, even in the face of a strong decline in income, companies will be able to continue work without any consequences.

Shares of "bicycles"
--------------------

Netflix, as one of the representatives of the bicycle companies, is perhaps the easiest example to understand the business model, which is based on the production of new content and growth of the subscriber base. It is the creation of content, which is the main source of costs, that determines the success of a business. If Netflix does not release new or interesting content, then subscribers begin to unsubscribe from it. As a result, the company shoots fewer series and programs.

In Europe and the US, competition among such services is high (Disney+, Hulu, Amazon Prime Video and others), which means that it is almost impossible to increase the subscription fee. If you do this, you can get a fatal outflow of subscribers for business. That is why, when Netflix reported its first quarter 2022 results, saying it predicted a drop in the number of subscribers, its shares lost 32% in one trading session.

There are a lot of companies like Netflix. They have a product that is in demand by customers, and they can make money, but only under certain conditions.

{{<ads>}}

Planned unprofitable companies
------------------------------

Peloton has become a symbol of COVID-19 for Americans who have decided to train at home and made a real stir around the company's equipment. At peak demand, customers waited more than nine months for the large monitor exercise bikes it makes.

Unfortunately, enthusiasm does not always equate to a working financial model. In 2021, Peloton sold a record number of products and doubled its revenue from $1.8 billion to $4 billion. However, it still continues to lose money.

In order to start earning, Peloton must continue to grow at multiples, but this is an unlikely scenario. When the lockdown in the world gradually began to be lifted, the company's shares began to actively fall in price, losing 90% in price since September 2021.

There are many companies like Peloton in the tech sector, but often the catalysts for their cost reduction may not be so obvious. That is why, in a period of rising inflation, such businesses pose a particular risk to investors.

{{<ads>}}

Is it possible to earn?
-----------------------

Despite the fact that the IT sector as a whole is going through an era of correction, sooner or later it will end. The main question that investors have to answer is: which companies are worthy of being in the portfolio again? In my opinion, one should focus on companies with a stable and diversified business model that are profitable and have sufficient liquidity to exist for a couple of years without raising capital and restructuring the business, or companies from the first echelon, that is, companies from the first group .

I can't argue that the 2022 correction is comparable to the dot-com bubble of the early 2000s. However, we should expect that the shares of a number of companies that have been on everyone's lips lately will go down in the foreseeable future. The period of big names that will never bring income to their investors has come to an end. It is worth paying attention to those who really earn money, regardless of the situation.

**Author:** *Sergey Belyaev, Managing Director of the Investment Department of UFG Wealth Management*