---
title: "$95B Aimed: Why Everyone's Waiting for Stripe's Mega Unicorn IPO"
description: One of the most expensive private companies in the world, Stripe, plans to go public this year with a projected valuation of $95 billion. Yana Shebalina, financial expert at Investing.com, talks about the service and its prospects for an IPO.
date: 2022-06-02T20:04:40+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-02T20:04:40+08:00
images:
- K3yLc5P.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- Yana Shebalina
interest: investment
channel: 
- shares
tags: 
---

The third largest startup in the world is planning an IPO. The upcoming listing of Stripe, a payment processing company, has generated huge media hype and investor enthusiasm. The megaunicorn's $95 billion valuation from its latest funding round last March makes it the third most valuable private company. Potentially, the listing of the company could be one of the largest public offerings in history. The company has already raised ten funding rounds, and investors include PayPal co-founders Elon Musk, Peter Thiel, and Max Levchin.

Note that last year, Stripe processed $640 billion worth of payments, which is comparable to the GDP of a small European country. Stripe's explosive growth has been helped in no small part by the boom in e-commerce during the pandemic. As a result, transaction volume has increased by 170% over the past two years. Let's take a closer look at this company.

About company
-------------

Online payment technology provider Stripe, an Irish-American project, is one of the most valuable private fintech companies. The startup was launched in 2010 by two brothers from Ireland - Patrick and John Collison.

The company is now headquartered in San Francisco and Dublin. In 2020, the startup ranked first on the CNBC Disruptor 50 list. In 2021, it is also ranked third on the Crunchbase Unicorn ranking of the most highly valued companies in the world.

Interestingly, prior to Stripe, most integrations took months to set up. In six months, the service has made a breakthrough, and now with its help, all companies need to do is add seven lines of code to their site to process payments. According to the company's CEO Patrick Collison, Stripe aims to increase the Internet's GDP.

Stripe currently supports 32 payment methods. The cost of services is 2.9% from each transaction, and the more payments the user makes, the less the commission becomes. Thus, the service annually processes payments for hundreds of billions of dollars for startups. One of the company's largest partners is the Amazon online store, Stripe processes a significant part of its transactions. The startup also works with the largest US retailer Target, AliExpress online service, Under Armor brand, Ford Motor Company and many others.

{{< ads >}}

Stripe has additional tools to help improve online business performance, such as the Radar fraud detection system, the company also acquired Indie Hackers, a service that contains application and program cases for entrepreneurs.

The tech startup has raised ten rounds of funding, from its Y-Combinator pre-funding round in 2010 to a Series H round in 2021, which raised Stripe $600 million at a $95 billion valuation. German insurance company Allianz was the main investors in the round. , US venture fund Sequoia Capital, US holding company Fidelity, and the Irish National Treasury Management Agency (NTMA). Stripe's investors also include Khosla Ventures, the Andreessen Horowitz Foundation, and PayPal co-founders Elon Musk, Peter Thiel, and Max Levchin. The proceeds will be used by Stripe to expand its staff in Dublin, add new services to Brazil, India and Indonesia, and expand its operations in Europe.

Market situation and prospects
------------------------------

According to the Wall Street Journal, Stripe's revenue grew to $7.5 billion in 2020, up 70% from a year earlier. The service has processed $350 billion worth of transactions while operating in nearly 50 countries. Last year, the service processed $640 billion worth of electronic payments.

{{< ads >}}

The startup plans to launch its own application marketplace - initially more than 50 applications will be available, including converting Stripe payments into bitcoins in real time. In March of this year, Stripe announced a line of products and tools to make it easier to buy and hold cryptocurrencies and NFTs.

Prospects for going public
--------------------------

While Stripe is a large service with impressive stats and high valuation, there are some risks involved. Shares of technology companies such as Alibaba Group, Uber Technologies, Rivian have lost more than 55% over the past year. The startup also competes with the American payment systems PayPal and Block.

However, the trend towards the development of e-commerce, launched by the pandemic, may continue to have a positive impact on the development of the company. The funds raised during the IPO, the startup plans to spend on the development of tools for small businesses - loans and banking services.

**Author:** *Yana Shebalina*