---
title: "A trifle, but nice: what encouragement really motivates employees"
description: Gratitude to an employee for a good job motivates and increases loyalty. But studies show that not all rewards will have the same effect.
date: 2022-06-11T16:42:22+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T16:42:22+08:00
images:
- IRYx5zx.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: management
channel: 
- team management
tags: 
---

When the situation on the labor market is difficult, employers support employees with the help of "buns". For example, streaming service Spotify offers a corporate subscription through which companies can reward employees. Goldman Sachs has allowed those who hold a sufficiently high position in the bank to take as many vacations as they want. However, this is only a nominal advantage, because no one who values ​​work-life balance climbs the ranks at Goldman. Cloud developer Salesforce holds meetings with workers at a ranch in California. And those who work long enough at Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin company could be sent into space.

For firms that don't have rockets or ranches, it may seem impossible to "surpass" such tempting offers. But in order to raise the working spirit and increase the loyalty of employees, small gestures of gratitude are enough. The only problem is that they cannot be scaled.

Scientists have conducted several studies on how employees are affected by the attention of the employer. One example is the work of professors at King's College London and Harvard Business School. In the course of the study, a group of social workers was randomly divided into two parts: members of one group received a letter of thanks from their immediate supervisor for their work, and members of the other received nothing. According to a survey conducted a month later, the recipients of the letter felt much more appreciated than colleagues who were not thanked.

A similar study was carried out in 2010. It found that university fundraisers, who were personally thanked by a senior staff member for their work, made many more calls to alumni asking for donations during the week following this small act of appreciation than they had the week before. In the control group, which received no gratitude, there were no statistically significant changes.

{{<ads>}}

Another study involved workers at a Coca-Cola company in Madrid. Some of them were secretly asked to do something nice for their colleagues: bring a drink, for example, or email a thank you note. The participants in this experiment had increased levels of job satisfaction, and the recipients of "amenities" began to do more kind deeds towards other colleagues.

Employers can draw two conclusions from such studies. The first is that gratitude has a tangible effect on employees, and the second is that the effect is enhanced by giving thanks personally and unexpectedly. Companies rush to take advantage of the first lesson and completely forget about the second.

Many firms have developed special employee recognition programs that include bonuses and awards. Companies create internal bulletin boards where colleagues can publicly thank each other for their work and collect points that can be exchanged for gifts and experiences. Managers on special sites can get advice on what to say to subordinates so that they feel that they are valued in the company. This is an attempt to pass off the script as sincerity. Quote example: “Congratulations on your big win! Only you could win it!” It sounds, however, like a greeting card from Napoleon.

Gratitude "for show" completely loses its meaning. There is no more sincerity in automatic birthday and anniversary greetings than in an invoice. Platforms where workers publicly acknowledge the accomplishments of others cultivate formal praise. Especially if all the messages are collected in order to show the boss. One company that works to improve employee engagement tracks expressions of gratitude and categorizes them into terrible categories like "Recognition for results" and "Building trust, like a family."

{{<ads>}}

Bonus schemes also need to be handled with care. They are good for those who are “on horseback”, and worse motivate those who have no chance. In one study conducted in 2014, researchers examined the impact of a rewards program on Zambian health interns. They found that comparison with others impairs performance, especially for less capable workers.

The secret is that you need to recognize merit in moderation. In addition, the expression of gratitude requires effort: a handwritten note is better than an email, which in turn is better than an automatic program. Gratitude must be expressed personally. It doesn't have to be a scheme made up by the HR department. And saying "thank you" is rare enough to appreciate this sign of attention. Thanks to everyone for everything turns it into a commodity. In other words, this is not a big data project. Individual leaders can use small gestures of appreciation to make a difference in the lives of their subordinates. The best thing that can be done at the company level is to hire people who understand this.

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*