---
title: "How the volatility of the ruble complicates the work of financial directors"
description: Financiers are no strangers to the high volatility of the ruble. However, the current situation is extraordinary - the rate jumps almost twice in one direction or the other. What does this mean for the CFO, explains financial expert Nadezhda Rozhkova
date: 2022-06-02T20:08:29+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-02T20:08:29+08:00
images:
- 7FJ01oy.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Nadezhda Rozhkova
interest: finance
channel: 
- financial strategy
tags: 
---

Any currency whose rate fluctuates daily in the range of 10-15% and resembles, in the apt expression of my friend, “the movement of rabid cockroaches in the bank”, is volatile. Therefore, the ruble has long been included in the category of volatile currencies. All Russian financiers take this for granted.

The only significant difference in the current situation is that we are seeing even sharper fluctuations in the exchange rate than before: from the conditional 77 rubles. at the end of February to 120 rubles. in early March and then to 58 rubles. in the middle of May.

[Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) 's May statement that the ruble has become the best currency to strengthen against the dollar does not run counter to his own words about the primacy of the ruble among the most volatile currencies in the world. The ruble is still pegged to the dollar and euro, and Russia still belongs to the countries with developing economies.

The current situation is of extreme concern to economists, since people who work with money like to feel the ground under their feet in order to clearly predict the future fate of assets. Working with a currency that experiences such fluctuations in the exchange rate is like steering a ship during a storm: when there is such a pitching at sea, only professionals with a strong vestibular apparatus can keep the course. Therefore, the environment is unfavorable for any innovations and innovations - the risks that investments will not pay off are too high.

How ruble volatility affects business
-------------------------------------

There are quite a few studies that study the impact of the volatility of quotes of any financial asset on business. The vast majority of them agree that there are industries that can benefit from a volatile currency. In Russia, these include:

*   the financial sector, since there you can receive additional income from speculative games on the stock exchange with the ruble-dollar (RUB/USD) and ruble-euro (RUB/EUR) trading pairs;
*   business whose income is associated with non-ruble currencies is traditionally the oil and gas sector.

But in the real sector of the economy, including in industries that operate on the territory of the Russian Federation, volatility only creates problems. Financiers are obliged to take it into account when forming economic and financial goals for the year, in particular:

**1\. When calculating fees in trading strategies, high fluctuations of the ruble against current world currencies seriously affect pricing policy.**

Usually, in order for the company's strategy for the year to look more or less adequate and not to "jump" after the exchange rate, financiers lay the budget at the average rate they predicted. Predicting the exchange rate with such high volatility as the ruble is already a great art.

If the forecast was not justified and it is impossible to do without raising prices - otherwise the necessary marginality of the product will fall, then you need to calculate the increase. Here, financiers proceed from what percentage of the cost of goods is occupied by expenses that depend on currency fluctuations. For example, the share of foreign exchange costs included in the cost is 20%. This means that it is these 20% that are subject to recalculation to set new prices.

{{< ads >}}

Now many companies have the following situation: they bought raw materials at a time when the dollar was high, so when the ruble strengthened, they received an inflated cost. But to reduce prices or not, each company will decide on its own.

**2\. When assessing investment risks - in capital-intensive projects, the volatility of the currency becomes a stumbling block.**

It is necessary to take into account the safest, most liquid currency pairs so that investments do not turn into dust in one moment. The principle of using currency pairs is that the ratio within one pair of currencies is hedged (insured) with the help of another. Let's say we need to hedge the euro-dollar pair (EUR/USD) on the principle that more dollars will be given for the euro. In this case, another pair is selected to insure risks, for example, "dollar - Swiss franc" (USD / CHF), where more francs will be given for the dollar. In the selection of the most liquid pairs, it is customary to focus on the currency markets.

In addition, it adds work and control of fluctuations in the ruble exchange rate. To pay for goods, a financier cannot simply buy currency from a bank. He must constantly monitor fluctuations, trying to guess the most profitable rate.

Of course, companies can also make money through speculation, but there is one simple rule: the return on the core business of the enterprise must be higher than the return on investment in financial assets. If the situation is reversed, then why run a business that does not make a profit?

{{< ads >}}

How to protect yourself from exchange rate fluctuations
-------------------------------------------------------

If an enterprise is located on the territory of the Russian Federation and receives income in rubles, it has two options for effective actions.

**The first is to convert business expenses into rubles as much as possible, especially if the company works exclusively with Russian suppliers.**

At the end of March, the FAS proposed to completely ban inside Russia contracts linked to foreign currency or world commodity indices. However, the bill has not yet been adopted. This means that in this situation only negotiations with a tough position that the company operates in the ruble zone and plans to purchase only in rubles will help.

**The second is to take care of additional insurance mechanisms.**

This is relevant if the company works with foreign suppliers or with those companies that cannot be persuaded to pay in rubles. Such a tool can be currency hedging on the fact of transactions for the sale or purchase of currency. At the same time, hedging instruments can be either exchange-traded (options and futures) or over-the-counter (forward contracts and swaps). It is better for beginners to use over-the-counter instruments, since going public suggests that the company has large assets and special treasury departments. However, in the long term, it is better to hire financial directors who know all these tools, or to train staff.

Although banks today are reluctant to provide currency hedging services, it still remains an effective mechanism for fixing the value of a currency and reducing risks due to exchange rate fluctuations.

**Author:** *Nadezhda Rozhkova, financial expert*