---
title: "Cornell professor: Humans are 'cognitive misers'"
description: Psychologist Vanessa Bones argues that people influence others much more than they think. About three strategies of persuasion, “cognitive misers”, well-formed requests for help and relationships at work - in a selection of her quotes
date: 2022-06-12T22:50:44+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T22:50:44+08:00
images:
- hpPLTCl.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Ilr.cornell'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: self development
channel: 
- business guru
tags: 
---

It's easy to convince others
----------------------------

Social psychologist Vanessa Bones argues that people can actually influence the actions and decisions of others more than they think. “When we are negotiating a salary, having an interview, exchanging ideas or asking someone for a favor, we often assume that we will be turned down. But in fact, in most cases, these fears are groundless, just the peculiarities of the psyche make us underestimate our influence on others, ”says the professor. According to Bons, there are three strategies that will help you achieve what you want.

1.  **Don't weigh every word**

“When you offer something to a leader, you think that he analyzes every word, so that he can then reasonably refuse. But as researchers at the University of Texas have found, people just don't listen or remember most of what they're told,” Bones says. People are, as psychologists like to say, “cognitive misers”: they do only the minimum necessary to navigate the situation. Only an exceptional need or increased motivation prompts a thorough analysis.

Bones says that the details are quickly erased in memory, and only the essence remains. “That means your boss is more likely to remember the gist of your sentence, not how clear or slurred you said it,” Bones points out.

2.  **Address the person personally**

When there is a need to convince someone or ask for something, the question arises how to do it - by phone, via e-mail, send a voice message or go into the office and talk in person.

{{<ads>}}

At first glance, e-mail seems like the best option, because the rejection in this case does not feel as painful as in person. “But email gives the person you're asking for an easy way out: it's easier to say no to a letter. Therefore, personal communication is one of the most effective tactics that we have. At the same time, it is not used enough, ”Bones points out.

3.  **Build Your Confidence**

According to research, people do not feel confident enough when they want to be listened to, as they expect rejection. Uncertainty is not always a bad thing - it forces you to put in more effort, double-check your work, analyze and listen to advice. And yet uncertainty often becomes a big problem. Because of it, a person tries too hard to be heard, and relies too much on the advice of other people.

“Have you ever spent half a day preparing and editing an email only to get a two-word reply in half a minute? This is what uncertainty leads to - inefficiency and irrationality, ”writes Bons.

Very often we believe that we are treated worse than they actually are, and it is important not to forget about this. “So whatever impression you think you make on the other person, assume that the reality is much better,” urges Bones.

Bones' research has shown that people are more willing to listen to people they like. That is, before trying to get what you want from a person, you need to find a common language with him. For example, you can drink coffee or chat on abstract topics. This way you can establish a trusting relationship. “This increases the likelihood that people will listen to you when you want to influence some of their decisions,” Bones points out.

The expert argues that compliments play a big role. She conducted a study in which she asked participants to compliment a random person, after which they were given an envelope with a small survey. It turned out that the compliment had a strong impact. “At first, people felt a little embarrassed, but after the compliment, their mood improved,” Bons says.

Through her research, Bons found that actions speak louder than words. “If we officially advocate one thing (for example, that employees should not be punished for sick days), and then accidentally say the opposite (for example, ridicule a colleague who took several days of sick leave), then it doesn’t matter how convincing the original argument sounded. about staying home when sick, people will feel like they can't do it without judgment,” says Bons.

{{<ads>}}

Don't be afraid to ask for help at work.
----------------------------------------

People are afraid to ask colleagues for help at work. Bones argues that three common misconceptions are to blame.

1.  **Myth one: the person who asks looks incompetent**

Many people think that asking for help is evidence of incompetence. Also, in a crisis, it may seem safer to keep your head down and keep your head down.

However, studies show that such fears are largely unfounded. “In one experiment, asking for help with a simple task had no negative effect on the asker's perceived competence. Moreover, in the same study, asking for help in solving a complex problem actually led to the fact that the competence of the asker began to be assessed higher, ”the expert writes.

Thus, asking for help in some cases may present the person asking in a more positive light. “While asking for help can expose vulnerabilities and shortcomings, people are not as likely to think badly of others because of weakness as we think,” Bones adds.

2.  **Myth two: if I ask for help, they will definitely refuse me**

Another reason why people try not to ask for help is the fear of rejection. Each person assumes that everyone has a lot to do, and does not want to add worries to others. “But again, research shows that people are willing to not only help, but put a lot of effort into it,” Bones adds. In one study, participants underestimated both the number of people who would agree to help them complete a simple task and how hard each person would work on it. In another study, participants rated the effort a former colleague was willing to put in to write a letter of recommendation for them much lower. “All of this means that not only do people say yes more often than we think, but contrary to our expectations, they tend to do their best,” Bones adds.

3.  **Myth three: when people agree to help, they do it reluctantly**

“When we want to ask someone for help, we evaluate the efforts of the other person and the inconvenience that he will experience. As a result, it seems to us that we are being imposed, ”writes Bons. At the same time, people lose sight of the fact that a colleague, by providing help, receives some benefit himself. “Studies show that the pleasant feeling of doing someone a favor (sometimes referred to as the “warm light” of helping) helps to cope with negative emotions. Helping others also promotes mental well-being,” points out the psychologist. That is, the opportunity to help someone is uplifting.

Asking for help benefits both the supplicant and the helper, as it creates a sense of social connection. People can maintain and even strengthen relationships by asking for support. Being able to help a specific person can sometimes be more emotionally rewarding than donating to charity because it involves personal contact.

“And if you ask for something and get rejected, don’t worry,” urges Bones. “While we automatically assume that “no” is about us, our request, or the degree of helpfulness of another person, more often than not, people say no due to circumstances.” According to statistics, if you ask another time or another person, then most likely help will come.

{{<ads>}}

In working relationships, employees tend to forget that the manager is also a person, Bons says. The boss cares about the respect of his employees. And he feels guilty and embarrassed if he fails his direct reports. But people, as a rule, do not understand the way of thinking of those to whom they are addressing. “They don't realize that the social pressure to comply is very, very strong. People, even leaders, often find it harder to say no than to say yes,” Bones points out.

{{<info>}}
Vanessa Bones is a social psychologist and professor at Cornell University.

Bons specializes in interpersonal interactions, and in particular on how people ask for help, how they influence others, how they show compliance and why they give consent. Author of You Have More Influence Than You Think.

Her research has been published in leading academic journals in psychology, management, and law, as well as in The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Atlantic, and The Economist, among other media.

Included in the list of the most promising experts in the field of management Thinkers50.
{{</info>}}

Power and imbalance of influence
--------------------------------

Continuing the theme of the relationship between superiors and subordinates, Bones recalls the case of former McDonald's CEO Steve Easterbrook. In 2019, he was fired after it became known about his romantic relationship with a colleague. Despite the fact that the affair was consensual, the company felt that the CEO had violated corporate rules. Bones points out that in this case there is a problem of power and an imbalance of influence.

{{<ads>}}

According to Bons, the problem is that it is difficult for people in power to see the coercive nature of their power in unbalanced relationships. “People who flirt with co-workers underestimate how uncomfortable it is for courtship victims to reject them,” Bones points out.

Bones urges leaders to be careful because they have power in their hands. As her research has shown, even simple polite requests can seem like a decree if they come from a boss. However, people in leadership positions tend to be oblivious to the influence they have on others because they don't view the situation from the perspective of their subordinates. “This makes it difficult for powerful people to recognize when the other person feels compelled to comply with a request,” Bones points out.

_Sources: CNBC, Harvard Business Review, The Conversation, interview with McKinsey & Company._

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*