---
title: "Why the influence of the dollar and the euro is fading away and what will happen next"
description: 
date: 2022-06-03T19:40:00+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-03T19:40:00+08:00
images:
- nAdnxj6.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Tsering Topgyal / AP'
authors:
- Mikhail Vasiliev
interest: investment
channel: 
- currency
tags: 
---

Over the past two months, the ruble has been steadily growing, and it is logical that if the same factors persist - high prices for oil, gas and other export raw materials - it may sharply strengthen in June. At the beginning of the week, the price of oil rose to a two-month high after the news that the leaders of the EU countries agreed on a partial ban on the import of Russian oil, and at the same time the ruble rose for a short time. What factors speak in favor of the strengthening of the Russian currency?

First of all, with regard to oil and gas, we believe that in the coming month, Brent prices will remain above $110 per barrel, and spot gas prices in Europe will remain above $800 per thousand cubic meters. Rising commodity prices largely offset the decline in exports due to sanctions.

An impressive influx of foreign exchange earnings into the country, a drop in demand for currency within the country due to sanctions restrictions can also play in favor of the strengthening of the Russian currency - imports have shrunk, foreign investment and tourist trips abroad have decreased. In April, the current account surplus of the Russian balance of payments could amount to $37.6 billion against the seasonal norm of $7 billion, and in May and June, probably, there will be similar figures.

Previously, this foreign exchange inflow was compensated by the purchases of foreign currency by the Ministry of Finance within the framework of the budget rule (currency warehousing in the NWF) and the outflow of capital. However, after the introduction of Western sanctions, both of these channels for sterilizing the currency are closed and the ruble may continue to grow.

{{< ads >}}

Also in favor of the ruble is a new scheme of payment for Russian gas by European consumers through Gazprombank, which is actually equivalent to a 100% sale of foreign exchange earnings.

Taking into account all these factors, we believe that in a positive scenario for the ruble, the trading range for the dollar / ruble pair in June could be 50-60 and euro / ruble - 53-63.

What can shake the position of the ruble
----------------------------------------

The strengthening of the ruble is unprofitable for the budget of the Russian Federation and exporters, who, with the strengthening of the ruble, receive less income. The Ministry of Finance and most of the largest Russian companies included in their budgets for this and next years the exchange rate of the ruble 70+. As the dollar/ruble pair settled below 60, the Russian authorities began to express concern about the strong ruble exchange rate. As a result, the Bank of Russia at an extraordinary meeting on May 26 lowered the key rate immediately by 3%, to 11% per annum. A decrease in the key rate reduces the attractiveness of ruble deposits and leads to lower interest rates on loans, which increases the demand for imports and foreign currency. The Central Bank left a signal that it will continue to reduce the key rate at the next meetings.

At the next meeting on June 10, probably another rate cut by 1%, to 10% per annum. In addition, you need to remember that in early June, three-month deposits in banks, which were issued at rates of 20+, end. Following the reduction of the key rate, deposit rates will decrease, which will reduce the attractiveness of ruble deposits. As a result, some depositors may decide to spend these funds on consumption (including imported goods, which will increase the demand for foreign currency for their purchase) and on the purchase of foreign currency for investment purposes.

{{< ads >}}

Another tool to curb the strengthening of the ruble is the likely continuation of the easing of hard currency restrictions for exporters and residents. It is possible that exporters will be further weakened from the current 50% of the mandatory sale of foreign exchange earnings, and residents will be allowed to withdraw more funds abroad.

Also in favor of increasing demand for foreign currency will be the gradual establishment of new logistics chains for the purchase of imported goods (reorientation from Europe, the USA and Japan to China, Turkey, India, the CIS countries and the Middle East).

Finally, the Treasury may announce some version of a new fiscal rule with the purchase of foreign exchange assets in reserves - for example, Chinese yuan, Indian rupees instead of the old dollars and euros.  
An external negative factor for the ruble could be a fall in oil and gas prices, for example, due to a slowdown in the global economy, anti-COVID lockdowns in China, and tightening of the monetary policy of the US Federal Reserve. Considering all these factors, we believe that in an unfavorable scenario for the ruble in June, the trading range for the dollar / ruble pair in June could be 65-75 and euro / ruble - 68-78.

{{< ads >}}

Summing up both positive and negative factors, in the base scenario, we expect that in June the trading range for the dollar / ruble pair in June could be 60-70 and euro / ruble - 63-73.

Dollars and euros: buy or not
-----------------------------

Or is it better to pay attention to other currencies? Should I do it now or should I wait for a better rate? In our opinion, it would be reasonable to keep some part of the savings in the currency of the country where you are going to go on vacation or to buy imported goods.  
In general, after the start of the conflict in Ukraine, the arrest of Russia's foreign exchange reserves by Western countries and the imposition of sanctions, confidence in the dollar, euro and other Western currencies has decreased significantly.

Russia is promptly restructuring trade and financial flows from West to East, establishing import supplies from Asian countries, Turkey and the CIS countries. At the same time, the Russian Federation is actively establishing a transition to trade in national currencies (roubles, liras, yuans, rupees, etc.) instead of dollars and euros. It can be expected that in the coming years the influence of the dollar and the euro in Russia will decrease, while the role of the yuan, the Indian rupee and other regional currencies will increase.

**Author:** *Mikhail Vasiliev, chief analyst at Sovcombank*