---
title: "“Put stickers around the city”: a forgotten promotion that is back in business"
description: Although until recently it seemed otherwise, for marketing, the light has not converged on social networks. A number of former channels of promotion for Russians are now out of reach - but for many this is an occasion to rediscover alternatives. What — said Andrey Cherepanov (Catery)
date: 2022-06-07T05:07:49+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-07T05:07:49+08:00
images:
- czmr9VG.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Sloooshai / Instagram (the social network is owned by Meta, a company recognized as extremist and banned in Russia)'
authors:
- Andrey Cherepanov
interest: marketing and advertising
channel: 
- strategic marketing
tags: 
- lamp
---

When all the sudden changes in recent months began to take place in the country's advertising market, many were frightened. In particular, a ban on promotion in the most popular social networks in the country. But promotion there is not the only way to attract customers. And perhaps now is the time to try out alternatives.

Consider which of them are the most promising today.

Collaborations: friendship against the crisis
---------------------------------------------

The crisis has hit many companies, and collaborations can be a great win-win solution that will help attract new customers. If your business is aimed at a narrow audience, you should look for partners in a related niche. It is important that they do not compete with you directly.

A collaboration can take the following form:

*   discount;
*   joint product;
*   information project in social networks or mass media.

So, companies can get good collaborations with contemporary artists and museums. For example, Yandex.Food released NFT art objects together with the artist Ruslan Vyaltsev, and the TVOE brand launched a collection of T-shirts together with the Tretyakov Gallery.

Fashion and perfume brands can also be interesting partners. For example, Aroma Library, together with KFC and Delivery, launched their line with Chicken Wings and Apple Pie perfumes. This also includes sporting events (marathons, bike races), charity events, etc.

Conferences: you can again
--------------------------

For b2b companies, large business events can also become a good tool for promotion: if they were banned until recently, now they are back in the game. And this is a good opportunity to strengthen the reputation of the company's experts and present the product to potential partners and customers.

Plus, a profile event can become a good platform for effective networking: finally, you can once again personally meet potential partners for collaborations or make deals with companies in the b2b segment.

{{< ads >}}

Direct Dialogue: Return of BTL
------------------------------

Crisis is the time when direct dialogue with the consumer is most effective. And now it is possible both online and offline. If we talk about the offline format, it can be client days, tastings, meetings and parties.

If you like online, a supportive live broadcast on one of the available sites can be a good tool. Find out from your subscribers how they are doing, share the latest news from the life of the company, invite a professional psychologist and make a joint checklist of how to please yourself in a crisis. A joint digital product will be distributed by word of mouth, and potential consumers will find out about you.

Finally, we note that today the good old BTL communications are also returning. At the same time, in order to attract customers, it is not necessary to buy a billboard at TTK or sew a life-size puppet for a promoter.

You can organize a small creative communication that will work just as well. For example, you can make a series of bright stickers with wishes, parting words or funny quotes and stick them in different locations (upon prior agreement with the city authorities). So does, for example, the well-known public Sloooshii. The founders “listen to the city” and put up stickers with overheard phrases indicating the hashtag of the public, thereby increasing their audience.

Discounts and bonuses in a new way
----------------------------------

The crisis causes an instinctive desire to save, so discounts and bonuses are now especially in demand. However, this tool should be treated with caution: regular large discount promotions can devalue the product, and the consumer will be less motivated to purchase at full price.

Therefore, it is more efficient to think over an individual loyalty program with bonuses and cashback. This will increase the customer retention rate - everyone needs money in any expression.

On the one hand, banks today limit cashback: Rosbank has suspended the discount on purchases from partners, Alfa-Bank has canceled bonuses for purchases at catering establishments using the Yandex.Plus card. On the other hand, other companies act differently. Wildberries, on the contrary, introduced an additional cashback for MIR cardholders and increased the buyer's discount to 22%, while VTB introduced an increased cashback for payroll cards.

{{< ads >}}

In addition, now food delivery services are making it a part of their loyalty programs to help charitable foundations and implement it in a game format in their applications.

Referral program: looking for our ways
--------------------------------------

The referral program is now taking on special significance. It has become much more difficult for brands to find customers through social networks. But a loyal customer can still share the experience of interacting with your brand on available platforms.

If you work with corporate clients, but your product suits their employees directly, you can also use this channel to attract a new audience.

Work with the client base: softer and kinder
--------------------------------------------

Against the backdrop of a reduction in the number of available advertising channels, working with the existing client base is of particular importance. First of all, these are automatic email newsletters, notifications in messengers, push notifications, etc. How to use it today?

It is worth noting here that now supportive communications are especially in demand in these channels. Rigid "selling" techniques do not work well today. But humane mailings about what worries a wide audience “come in” well. Therefore, all mailings and alerts now contain the message: look, this can help you.

What else can be done in this direction?

*   Send a trigger email with a reminder of the accumulated cashback.
*   Show what's new.
*   Happy birthday.
*   Ask if you liked everything in the last order.
*   Make a themed collection for the holiday.

**Author:** *Andrey Cherepanov*, COO of Catery service