---
title: "Business analytics in a company: how to assemble a team for your project"
description: Andrey Bushuev (A17 Technologies) knows how business analytics allows you to identify problems in the work of an organization and make competent management decisions, what specialists are needed and what they do
date: 2022-06-11T13:55:10+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T13:55:10+08:00
images:
- j3JEnfw.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Andrey Bushuev
interest: hr
channel: 
- recruitment
- instructions
tags: 
---


The main purpose of business intelligence is to support management decisions. Based on the interpretation of various indicators, the company gets a picture of the state of the business in the present, past and future. This helps the manager to make managerial decisions and reduce (algorithmize) his analytical work.

For example, you need to make a decision to open a regional branch. But which region and city to choose for this? The manager sets the task for the business intelligence team, and they, in turn, are engaged in collecting, structuring and interpreting data from internal IT systems. They find out in which region business trips of employees are most often organized and where the profitability of the business is maximum, but there is no working branch. As a result, the data team provides an analytical report (summary) in a tabular or graphical form, which shows the comparison of regions, reflects the number of business trips and profitability. As a result, the leader can make an objective decision.

As a rule, business intelligence involves two scenarios for working with data: analysis and reporting. Most of the time they are related. For example, you analyzed the frequency of business trips and profitability, and then realized that these indicators require your constant monitoring. So, the data is summarized in a report that is provided weekly or monthly.

For a long time, only large enterprises could afford a separate team. Now medium-sized businesses are already thinking about it.

Business analytics: what are the commands
-----------------------------------------

The composition of the business intelligence team largely depends on the maturity and size of the company itself. There are three structures in the base case.

{{<ads>}}

### Structure one: IT professional plus manager or assistant

This structure is typical for start-ups and young companies. There is a clear line between business and IT. In this case, the IT specialist has database (DB) skills, knows which database he needs and how to write an SQL query to it. At the same time, he is not very well versed in the business specifics of the data and can only work on point queries.

For its part, the manager generates requests for unloading certain data. Himself or with the help of an assistant transforms the resulting arrays, conducts a visual analysis and interprets them. If there are few requests, then this approach to organizing work is very effective. You do not need to hire a large staff of specialists.

This scheme of work is widespread among small and medium-sized businesses with a low degree of process digitization. Some companies have lived in this paradigm for many years. At the same time, it is extremely **inefficient** , since the IT specialist remains an IT specialist and does not delve into the essence of the requests, he fulfills them simply because there is no one else to do it. And the manager is forced to blindly search the data for the answer without understanding the technical limitations imposed by the source, and without prior modeling of the data. And the more requests there are, the more often both the IT specialist and the manager are not busy with their direct duties. It hurts work.

### Second structure: data team or analytics team as a service for the entire company

This structure is adopted in mature companies when the heads of several structural units or heads of several development projects want to analyze the data. In this case, the business intelligence team is isolated, becomes a single entry point for requests, and turns into an internal service by analogy with IT support. The key metrics of such a service are the time for preparing an analytical result at the request of a business, the stability of updating an existing set of metrics and reports.

The team includes a data engineer if there is big data, or a DWH/SQL developer if there is no big data. In fact, these specialists are responsible for the technical means and methods that make data available for analysis. This is the collection of data, their sources, cleaning, enrichment, transformation, storage in an optimal form, updating data.

In addition, the team includes a data scientist (if it is big data) - an analyst, experimenter and researcher who is looking for a way to solve a business problem, for example, predicting when the buyer will make the next purchase or terminate the contract. He prepares a data set, extracts features, experiments with models, makes a pilot run of the model.

A consulting analyst is often seen as proficient in a standalone data analysis or visualization tool such as Qlik. It draws specific dashboards, programs in them the logic of the user (manager) with data, navigation through reports and the entire interactive, if any.

Also in the data team there is a solution architect - a pure IT specialist. In his area of ​​responsibility is the choice of technical means for the analytical system of the company, all its components, taking into account the corporate architecture and other internal regulations. For example, he must choose a specific database management system based on the business requirements for this data. If the manager wants to collect and analyze the materials of competitive procurement procedures, then a document-oriented DBMS, such as Mongo, is required, and Microsoft SQL Server, common to most enterprise solutions, can be used for classic small process data.

In this structure, the line between IT and business employees is no longer so clear. So, a data scientist can be much more of a mathematician than an IT specialist, and solve business problems. Like a consulting analyst, he owns the tool and must be well versed in the subject area in order to accurately visualize the data.

{{<ads>}}

**The advantage** of the service approach is that a response to requests can be received in the shortest possible time, and analytics is used where it is needed. The request can be generated by any department. At the same time, there are general rules for the operation of the service and one common IT data analysis system used to solve business problems, which means that it is easier to maintain and develop. The time of valuable specialists of the business intelligence team is fully utilized.

**The disadvantage** of this structure is that data team members slowly accumulate expertise in certain areas of the business, as they often jump from the tasks of one department to another. For example, yesterday we were engaged in financial analytics, and today - marketing.

### The third structure: separate data teams for each line of business, sharing a common infrastructure

In this case, the enterprise no longer works with a single business intelligence team, but with several. This **approach is typical** for mature companies with a long history and expertise. Most often, the driver of the transition to such a structure is the consolidation of the business and the desire of management to accumulate analytical expertise in a particular area. For example, separate teams are singled out in marketing, finance, logistics, loyalty, etc. In this scheme, a business analyst or consultant is immersed in a specific area of ​​​​knowledge. A specialist does not need to switch attention and inflame his skills. It is tailored for a specific block of questions and solves problems as quickly as possible.

Another reason for the decentralization of data teams is the need for specific departments, departments or structural units to have their own data and their own unique tools for working with them. For example, the marketing department may need to collect and store really big data on customer behavior (checkouts, reactions to marketing campaigns, social data), which means that the programs and approaches that were used by the finance department to monitor and analyze indicators will no longer be suitable - another one is needed. DBMS and other algorithms.

**The disadvantage** of this approach is the high cost and the need for constant loading. Highly specialized employees are more expensive and hard to find on the market. In addition, it may turn out that employees are not interchangeable. You can't take a consulting analyst from one team and put him on another.

{{<ads>}}

Team building
-------------

In practice, there are rare examples of business analysts being hired from outside in the early stages of business development. As a rule, a data team begins to form within the company around development tasks. The first to appear is the role of a business analyst or team leader, as well as an IT specialist who ensures the execution of requests.

It is worth noting that in the classical sense, a business analyst is not a data analyst or a developer in the usual sense. This is a person who designs the internal processes of the company. His responsibilities include optimizing existing processes, launching new and at the same time effective ones. Most often, a business analyst is a customer of digitalization IT projects and a leader (coordinator) of a data team.

The expansion of the team and the transition to the second level occurs when there is a need for a technical specialist who must devote all his time to working with data. He becomes a data engineer. Most often, this happens through the allocation of an individual employee from the IT department or the hiring of a new one with the appropriate skills. Initially, tasks for this person may be set by the IT manager or the project (analytical system) manager. Further, when there is even more work on data analysis and visualization, an analyst-consultant appears on the staff.

A data engineer and an analyst-consultant begin to work in pairs. The area of ​​responsibility of the first is technology, in the hands of the second is work on the result and visualization, he collects requirements from the business, works with the system customer (manager).

At the next stage, the company has a request for more advanced analytics. At this point, data scientists appear in the team who have knowledge of specific methods of working with data and mathematics.

The issue of finding and attracting qualified data specialists in Russia is more acute than ever. The demand for them is very high. Most often, people with a proven track and completed projects have to be hunted. Especially often this happens from companies - integrators of IT solutions. But there are examples when teams for business intelligence projects are assembled from scratch, develop independently and achieve high results. The backbone of these teams is made up of young data scientists right after graduating from universities.

It is worth noting that it is much more difficult for non-digital companies to assemble a high-quality data team. This is largely due to a lack of competencies. Problems can begin already at the stage of setting goals.

{{<ads>}}

How to organize work
--------------------

The organization of the work of teams that solve business intelligence tasks depends on the stage of maturity of the company and the structure that is adopted in it. If this is a single service for everyone, then, as a rule, the team works according to the rules of the Service Desk. First, applications fall into the system, they are taken into work, processed, executed, confirmed and closed. Some of the applications in the queue are prioritized. Standard ITSM approaches are used here.

In the case of a decentralized data team, its work is organized as part of a specific project. It is subject to the general work schedule. If this is some kind of long-term project, then it can be carried out in a standard predictive mode - sequentially. In addition, an increasing number of business development projects are working on an agile model. In this case, there is a common backlog from which the team picks up its tasks and regularly demonstrates the results of analytical activities. This allows you to flexibly manage what kind of analytics you need to perform and see, as well as how to develop your own analytical system within a particular department (project). For example, in the case of exploratory analytics, it is possible to create some kind of unique machine learning model, which will later turn into a new digital product.

Company executives should also be aware that the interaction between IT specialists and employees of business areas is often difficult: people speak different languages, communication is disrupted, and conflict situations arise. To simplify the interaction of employees within the company, you should create a catalog of business objects or a glossary describing various terms, entities, relationships, etc.

In addition, specialists from different fields need to participate in the same activities. For example, data engineers should attend demonstrations of reports on business, customer service, and vice versa, employees who work with clients should attend meetings of technical specialists. As a result, employees must be able to ask each other competent questions, they must maintain a quality dialogue.

**Author:** *Andrey Bushuev, founder and CEO of A17 Technologies*