---
title: "When an IT specialist can be replaced by a software robot and save money"
description: The demand for IT professionals is growing, and with it their salaries. Some companies have started looking for an alternative to hiring IT people. One of the solutions was the robotization of some of the operations they perform. Can you do it, says IT-Expert magazine.
date: 2022-06-07T00:41:54+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-07T00:41:54+08:00
images:
- KSfMe4m.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Alex Knight / Unsplash'
authors:
- Kirill Chekhankov
interest: hr
channel: 
- team management
- business digitalization 
tags: 
- it expert
---

Despite the fact that the active distribution of software robots began about five years ago, today RPA technology (Robotic Process Automation - process automation based on the use of software robots. ) has become quite mature, developed, with a clear and quickly achievable business value indicator .

There is a lot of talk on the market about its use, for example, to automate accounting processes, the purchasing department, HR tasks, or robotization of operational departments. However, robots can also be effective assistants for IT professionals.

Such robots, in particular, are actively being created in Russia. For example, they help the IT team reduce the number of errors in the process of creating solutions by preventing them from performing standardized operations, they can increase the productivity of IT specialists by quickly completing tasks.

The quality of user experience thanks to the operational work of RPA is also growing: robots are able to respond to requests and resolve simple incidents faster than technical support staff.

{{< ads >}}

Place in the team
-----------------

Software robots can be successfully used to perform a wide range of tasks, such as monitoring servers and applications. RPA technology allows you to automate the shutdown, reboot and restart of servers in case of unforeseen situations. As a result, equipment maintenance costs are reduced, and the quality of service, on the contrary, is increased, since robots work at any time, including after hours and holidays. In addition, they can be assigned to install applications on many machines at the same time: the speed of the process will not change from this, and the team's resources will be freed up for other tasks. Robots are not characterized by fatigue, burnout, poor health, so they are always extremely concentrated on the operation they perform, no matter how routine it is. In particular,

No less effective robots can be used to unlock user accounts and reset user passwords. They independently check their data and, if the results of the check are positive, take the necessary action to unlock or transfer the task to a technical support employee.

Another striking example is data migration: robots help to speed up this process, while the data safety is guaranteed the same as with manual transfer.

The limit of possibilities
--------------------------

Despite the fact that robots are constantly improving, their work remains mechanical, which limits their applications in software development. As you know, this process largely consists of searching for patterns and generating ideas - intellectual and creative work, beyond the power of a robot either now or in the near future. Thus, the complete replacement of IT specialists by robots is out of the question. Their active use not only in routine, repetitive operations, but also to improve the quality of service is just beginning.

During the pandemic, successful examples of the full-scale use of robots to solve IT problems have become much more. Curiosity also affects: a considerable number of IT specialists tend to want to test this or that innovation after some time of its presence on the market.

{{< ads >}}

Complete alternative
--------------------

Depending on the direction of activity and the level of digitalization of the company, it needs one or another composition of the IT team. If the work is related to simple software products, so-called coders are enough - specialists who write codes, and testers of relatively low qualification.

Many of their functions can be performed by robots. If a company is associated with complex software products, especially innovative ones, it needs a large number of qualified developers, analysts, designers, project managers, writing testers. It is they who will make up the bulk of the IT team, and the robot will help it by taking on some of the tasks of testing, maintaining IT products, and working with user requests, but its role will be insignificant.

Main stakeholders
-----------------

Among companies in which the work of IT specialists consists mainly of routine operations and technical support, those who have already automated a number of tasks of other employees should be the first to implement robots. We are talking, for example, about accountants or representatives of the HR department. Such companies will be able to quickly implement RPA in the work of IT specialists, as they understand the peculiarities of this process.

In addition, robots are objectively necessary for organizations that are familiar with the concept of a "burning project". In conditions where there is no time or financial resources to replenish the team, and tasks require urgent solutions, a company can free existing employees from routine with the help of a robot. His "hiring" will require less time and money than finding an experienced IT specialist. As you can see, despite the active development of software robots, the number of their consumers in the IT sector is still limited. However, in the next five years, these scales will seriously increase. Everything will depend on the popularization of successful examples of RPA implementation and increasing the openness of Russian business to innovation.

**Author:** *Kirill Chekhankov, Head of IT Solutions at Konica Minolta*