---
title: "$69 billion for VMware: what does a record deal in American IT mean"
description: 'In US IT, the second record deal in a year: Broadcom buys VMware for $69 billion. The combined company will become one of the leaders in the enterprise cloud computing segment, but experts fear that consumers will only lose from the deal'
date: 2022-06-02T21:51:36+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-02T21:51:36+08:00
images:
- V3THtIh.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Nick Lukhminsky
interest: investment
channel: 
- shares
tags: 
---

Broadcom has been trying to expand its presence in the market since 2017, when the company [offered](https://www.theverge.com/2017/11/6/16612154/what-is-broadcom-qualcomm-acquisition-offer) about $ 130 billion for the American semiconductor manufacturer Qualcomm. If the deal had taken place, the combined company would have become the third largest semiconductor manufacturer in the world at the time of signing the agreement. However, US President Donald Trump intervened in the negotiations.

In March 2018, the White House issued an [executive order](https://www.theverge.com/2018/3/12/17111766/broadcom-qualcomm-acquisition-blocked-trump-national-security) banning any deal between Broadcom and Qualcomm. The President of the United States was not so much worried that the once ardent competitors decided to join forces, but that in the event of a deal, a certain Singaporean company would take control of the two American semiconductor manufacturers. And this is a direct threat to national security, the officials emphasized. It was then about Broadcom Limited, a company registered in Singapore in 2016 as part of the merger of Broadcom Corp. and chipmaker Avago Technologies.

It seems that Broadcom understood the hint of the US President's office and, from the moment of the unsuccessful takeover of a direct competitor, decided to switch from hardware to software: in November 2018, the company received control over the developer of cybersecurity systems CA Technologies for $ 19 billion, and in August 2019 for $ 10.7 billion acquired the developer of corporate cybersecurity systems Symantec.

In May 2022, Broadcom continued its purchases: for a record-breaking $69 billion for the market, the developer of cloud solutions and virtualization VMware will become part of the company. The acquisition will allow Broadcom to become one of the leaders in enterprise cloud computing, but analysts say that, despite the seriousness of the parties' intentions, the deal may not go through, and for the clients of both companies, their merger could be a problem.

Record amount
-------------

The fact that the parties agreed on the merger became [known](https://www.vmware.com/content/dam/digitalmarketing/vmware/en/pdf/company/vmware-broadcom.pdf) on May 26. The principal deal is $61 billion, but Broadcom will also buy out $8 billion of VMware's debt, bringing the total to $69 billion, the largest in US IT market history. Until recently, the record was held by a deal between Dell and EMC - $67 billion, then they were surpassed by the purchase of the developer and publisher of video games Activision Blizzard by Microsoft Corporation - $68.7 billion, and now the record did not last even a year.

The purpose of the transaction, as indicated in its announcement, is the creation of a company - a full-cycle corporate infrastructure provider. Broadcom's EBITDA is projected to grow by approximately $8.5 billion over the next three years after the deal closes.

Broadcom will pay about half of the amount in cash, the other half in shares. VMware holders will have the option to receive either $142.5 per share they own or 0.252 shares of Broadcom. The premium is 44% to the share price on the eve of the deal announcement. As a result, 88% of the structure resulting from the transaction will be in the hands of Broadcom shareholders, 12% - with VMware shareholders. According to Broadcom's plans, all conditions for the purchase of VMware will be met before the end of fiscal year 2023. In this company, it will begin in November 2022. After the merger, the VMware brand will continue to exist: the software division of Broadcom Software Group, founded in 2021, will join it.

"Bringing together the complementary Broadcom Software portfolio and VMware platform, the new company will provide enterprise customers with an enhanced platform of mission-critical infrastructure approaches to accelerate innovation and meet the demands of the most complex information technology," the announcement said.

Shares of companies reacted weakly to the news. VMware shares caught the uptrend on May 18 and rose from $93 to $129 by the end of the month. After the news of the merger, growth continued. Also, Broadcom shares have been actively growing since May 24: their value increased from $524 to $583.

{{< ads >}}

What VMware and Broadcom Do
---------------------------

VMware is the largest developer of software for virtualization. The company was founded in California in 1998 by Berkeley alumni Diana Green and Mendel Rosenblum. In 2004, EMC, an American manufacturer of data storage systems, acquired control of VMware for $625 million. The new owner of VMware was taken over by Dell in 2015 for $67 billion. Together with EMC, she also got a stake in VMware.

Dell decided to raise funds for the takeover of EMC, significantly increasing the debt burden on the company. In 2021, Dell, which at that time owned 81% of VMware, decides [to spin](https://techcrunch.com/2021/04/14/dell-is-spinning-out-vmware-in-a-deal-expected-to-generate-over-9b-for-the-company/) off the software developer for cloud and virtual services into an independent company. As part of the deal, Dell received about $9.5 billion in dividends from VMware, in addition to this, the companies maintained close partnerships: Dell remained one of the firm's largest partners, and company founder Michael Dell continued to own a significant portion of VMware shares. The company's shares have been traded on the New York Stock Exchange since August 2007.

Broadcom is a semiconductor manufacturer best known for its modems, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth modules. Broadcom Corp. was founded in 1991 and remained independent until 2016. By 2011, the vendor was included in the Gartner rating of the largest semiconductor manufacturers in terms of revenue. From 1998 to 2016, shares of Broadcom Corp. were listed on the NASDAQ under the ticker BRCM.

In 2015, the management of Broadcom Corp. [agreed](https://investors.broadcom.com/news-releases/news-release-details/avago-technologies-acquire-broadcom-37-billion#:~:text=Under%20the%20terms%20of%20the,32%25%20of%20the%20combined%20company.) to a deal with another US semiconductor manufacturer, Avago Technologies. The parties completed the $37 billion merger by February 2016. The combined company was named Broadcom Limited and the ticker for Avago Technologies on the stock exchange is AVGO.

{{< ads >}}

Minimum synergy
---------------

VMware's takeover by Broadcom has already been approved by the company's boards of directors, but there's still a chance the deal won't go through. The parties have yet to secure the support of all VMware shareholders and obtain regulatory approval.

The largest shareholders of the company, however, have already stated that they do not object to the deal. Michael Dell and US investment fund Silver Lake, which own 40.2% and 10% of VMware, respectively, [have agreed to](https://apnews.com/article/technology-michael-dell-inflation-6b654d54abcfafc63b4c9e698a7235fd) vote in favor of the merger.

However, Broadcom's plans may be thwarted by competitors. [According to Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) sources , the parties included a provision on the so-called go-shop period in the preliminary agreement on the deal. This usually refers to the period of time during which a public company can look for competing offers to buy. Negotiations with other potential buyers in VMware can be carried out even in the case of a specific offer from Broadcom - usually the amount offered by the first potential buyer becomes a reference point for other interested companies. The publication [notes](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-25/vmware-is-said-to-include-go-shop-provision-in-broadcom-deal) that usually the go-shop period lasts from one to two months.

Analysts at High Watermark Investments [note](https://seekingalpha.com/article/4515200-vmware-broadcom-deal-lack-of-synergies) that despite the potential benefit from the merger for Broadcom and VMware, there are not so many beneficial synergies between products and divisions of the companies. In particular, analysts note that in the official announcement, the enterprises themselves note only three points of interaction between themselves. At the same time, on paper, the businesses of the two companies are moving in opposite directions: if software brings very little in the revenue structure of Broadcom, then for VMware this is the largest area that is actively growing.

High Watermark Investments also notes that VMware was already part of an iron manufacturer and was specially spun off into a separate business for more efficient management. However, experts say, if Broadcom has hitherto unknown plans for 5G networks, then the deal may make sense.

Among other potential buyers who during the go-shop period may outbid Broadcom's offer, experts [name](https://techcrunch.com/2022/05/29/should-oracle-or-alphabet-buy-vmware-instead-of-broadcom/) Intel, Amazon, Alphabet, Oracle, Microsoft and IBM.

At the same time, interaction with Intel looks the most profitable: the former head of VMware, Pat Gelsinger, now heads Intel, and the business plans of the two companies practically coincide: both are interested in cloud computing and data centers. However, Intel and other potential buyers are unlikely to want to interrupt Broadcom's offer.

{{< ads >}}

If VMware exits the deal and merges with another company, [it will have to](https://seekingalpha.com/news/3843323-broadcom-acquisition-of-vmware-includes-15b-termination-fee) pay a penalty of $1.5 billion. If the company accepts a better offer before the end of the day on July 5, 2022, only half of this amount will have to be paid. Broadcom, in turn, also risks paying $ 1.5 billion if it cannot complete the deal, including due to the decision of the regulator.

Consumers under attack
----------------------

The deal could trigger price increases in the industry, experts say, and an attempt to contain prices could negatively affect investment in innovation.

“If Broadcom focuses on innovation and makes cross-industry collaboration a priority, VMware and Symantec can achieve synergies. However, I see two problems. Firstly, this is easier said than done, and secondly, the strategy of buying up other Broadcom companies did not show its innovative thinking in the past, ”Navin Chhabr, a senior analyst at Forrester , [quotes The TechRepublic as saying.](https://www.techrepublic.com/article/broadcom-vmware-deal-good-for-investors-but-customers-may-suffer/)

Forrester notes that past big acquisitions by Broadcom, such as CA Technologies and Symantec, have driven consumer prices up and the customer experience down. Members of the professional community of system administrators, users of the r/sysadmin subreddit, [expressed](https://www.reddit.com/r/sysadmin/comments/uy5rr8/broadcom_to_officially_acquire_vmware_for_61/) their dissatisfaction with the potential merger : “Broadcom is the place where good software goes to die.”

**Author:** *Nick Lukhminsky*