---
title: "The collapse of the giants: why ecosystems die so often"
description: "Ecosystems don't have to fight for customers: there are almost limitless numbers of them. It is only necessary to form a habit among people to use their services. Why do 85% of ecosystems fail? Svetlana Beri, curator of the My\_Service platforms (Rosgosstrakh) tells more about it."
date: 2022-06-05T10:46:17+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-05T10:46:17+08:00
images:
- zq76N5i.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Spencer Platt/Getty Images'
authors:
- Svetlana Beri
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
tags: 
- rosgosstraakh
---

Amazon in the US, Alibaba Group and JD.com in China are taking full advantage of the ecosystems by constantly creating new offerings and adapting existing ones to a changing and growing customer base. This allows them to be resilient both during the spread of the coronavirus and during a new crisis.

A key feature of any ecosystem is that at its center is a client, around whose data offers, products, services, and their combinations are built. In 2018, McKinsey experts predicted that by 2025 the global turnover of ecosystems would be almost $60 trillion, or more than 30% of the revenue of all companies in the world. They noted that companies that actively build ecosystems and win customers are on average 15% higher than those that describe their strategy as “defensive.” Perhaps, due to the stagnation of the world economy this year, this forecast will be adjusted, but the conclusion is clear: ecosystem projects are growing, and their capitalization is increasing.

Goldman Sachs last year estimated the value of the non-financial ecosystem of Sberbank at 1.13 trillion rubles. For the first six months of the same year, investments in non-financial business companies of Sberbank were estimated at $1 billion, Vedomosti wrote.

The most active ecosystem owners are able to reach an almost limitless number of customers, use artificial intelligence and other tools to provide the highest level of service. Amazing business models are born from this: Facebook (the social network is owned by Meta, recognized as extremist and banned in Russia - RBC Pro) has become a major media player, but for a long time did not produce content on its own. Uber and Airbnb sell mobility and lodging around the world, but don't own cars or hotels.

At the same time, the creators of an ecosystem with a huge client base do not need to participate in the advertising budget race, hunt for a client, and try to “convert” him. Their task is only to form the habit of people to constantly refer to their ecosystem.

{{< ads >}}

Risks for Ecosystem Builders
----------------------------

The majority (85%) of ecosystems fail, BCG analysts calculated. The total losses of Sberbank from non-financial types of business in the first nine months of last year exceeded 32 billion rubles. Chairman of the Board of Sberbank German Gref announced his intention to sell part of the ecosystem projects. It follows that the creators of ecosystems take risks. Let's take a look at some of the less obvious ones.

**High entry threshold.** This is a risk both financially and in terms of competencies. Entering a new market in any case requires large investments. They may turn out to be ineffective, especially if the company does not have expertise in a new area for itself.

**With a passion for ecosystem solutions, some companies are trying to offer “all the best at once”.** The client can “within the framework of the ecosystem” drink coffee, send a parcel, and wash the car. The difficulty is that it is impossible to be an expert in all these areas at once, companies are forced to learn by doing. This is always fraught with loss of money.

**Shortage of IT specialists.** There are not enough such specialists even in quiet times, because even the smallest business has an IT component, the demand for developers, testers and engineers will only grow. The situation is aggravated by the severity of the current crisis: since February, according to various estimates, from 70 thousand to 200 thousand IT specialists have left Russia. Cool IT people have a queue of customers. And the more difficult the task, the more difficult it is to find worthy specialists.

**"End Performers".** All ecosystems rest on the last link in the chain - the performer. If several ecosystems have entered the car service market, they have to choose from a limited number of performers and compete for cooperation with each other. In addition, craftsmen and car services can earn both with and without the ecosystem and are often not interested in cooperation.

**Loss of customers with explosive growth.** A key challenge for any fast-growing business is maintaining a level of service. When there are more customers at once, the company may not have enough resources to serve them. If a loyal customer does not like the new service, he will leave and will not use other services of the company in the future.

**Price race.** When entering new markets, ecosystems often dump to attract new customers. The performers don't like it. As a result, it is difficult for ecosystems to offer quality services at low prices. Therefore, companies often limit promotions in time, but still manage to spoil customers with low prices, after which it turns out to be very difficult to transfer them to a fair payment. Small and non-monopoly players suffer greatly from this.

The telemedicine market almost got into this situation when telemedicine platforms began to compete on the cost of online appointments. At the same time, there is no pronounced price struggle in the market of high-quality offline medicine. Clinics attract clients with the qualifications of doctors and the quality of equipment. A similar strategy should have been used in telemedicine, but instead, dumping began, limiting the ability to involve high-level doctors in online consultations. Such price wars quickly pay off - you have to re-prove to customers that telemedicine does not mean low quality.

**Clumsiness.** Ecosystems are too big for their owners to make quick decisions. At the same time, they, as a rule, are a compilation of small and medium-sized companies. With the right organization of the process, the ecosystem can have all the advantages of a small business in the form of flexibility and service.

{{< ads >}}

Five recommendations for ecosystems in Russia this year
-------------------------------------------------------

**Focus on the core business of the company.** That is, do not invest in projects where the company does not have expertise. It is better to monetize the customers that the core business has. It may seem that such a move will not bring quick results, but in changing circumstances, such a strategy will definitely justify itself. Then companies will not be hindered by blocking Apple / Google Pay, they will continue to develop due to a powerful customer base and maintain growth dynamics at an acceptable level.

**Protect resources.** Ecosystems are often invested in conquering the market in order to reach the client faster than competitors. Too rapid growth is fraught with problems in “normal times”. This strategy becomes even more risky in crises. Companies that grow incrementally with the help of small teams have not had to shut down businesses or lay off employees during the coronavirus pandemic. And now you don't have to.

**Be honest with partners.** Partners are a key element of ecosystem business. Therefore, the owners of the ecosystem should support them, pay for services on time and help with resources.

**Work on "customer value".** Often, under the guise of a product, the client is offered not quite the right service or service. An impulse purchase is possible once, but if the customer is unhappy, it is unlikely to happen again. Therefore, it is worth making all products as full and useful as possible. Then, in a crisis, the client will not leave the ecosystem, will not be able to refuse a quality product and service that he is used to.

**Show flexibility.** A crisis is a time of especially intensive monitoring of the needs of the audience and changing the product to suit them. Ecosystem partners easily take on such work - for them this is an additional opportunity to earn money in a crisis. For example, during the spread of the coronavirus, taxi services that lost customers due to the lockdown switched over to express delivery for large and small partners in a matter of days.

Impact of sanctions on Russian ecosystems
-----------------------------------------

In early April, due to anti-Russian sanctions, Sberbank and Alfa-Bank applications were removed from the App Store and Google Play. Sber solved the problem and its products are still available. Android smartphone users can download applications of ecosystem products directly from the bank's website. With iPhones, the task is more complicated, but any large bank has a web version that allows you to carry out the usual operations through the site. Though, of course, and more slowly.

Alfa-Bank instructed users in detail on what to do - not to remove installed applications or manage a bank account through the organization's website.

Experts do not yet expect serious troubles from sanctions. An application for major players is just one of the communication formats. The value of the ecosystem lies elsewhere: IT content, suppliers, contractors, courier services.

**Author:** *Svetlana Beri, curator of My\_Service platforms (Rosgosstrakh)*