---
title: "Top managers are buying up shares of their companies: why this is good news"
description: The volume of insider purchases of shares in the US is breaking records. Former Starbucks CEO Schultz bought $15 million in shares, and RingCentral CEO Schmunis spent $1.2 million on the communications firm. The Financial Times and Bloomberg explain what this says.
date: 2022-06-02T09:30:55+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-02T09:30:55+08:00
images:
- oXJtTz8.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images'
authors:
- Kira Galkina
interest: investment
channel: 
- economics
- shares
tags: 
---

American top managers began to massively buy up cheaper shares of their companies. According to VerityData (formerly InsiderScore; tracks insider buying and selling), from May 1 to May 24, 2022, insider buying of S&P 500 stocks was the most significant since March 2020.

The Washington Service, which also collects and analyzes information about insider trading, counted more than 1,100 corporate managers and officials who bought shares in their firms in May 2022.

Now the US stock markets are in a downtrend. And experts are not the most optimistic forecasts. According to the legendary investor Michael Burry, the hero of the movie "The Big Short", what is happening in the markets resembles a plane crash. “It hurts, it’s not fun, and I’m not laughing,” Burry wrote on his Twitter account (the investor predicted the 2008 mortgage crisis and made $100 million against the market for himself and $700 million for Scion Capital investors, whom he then ruled).

But, according to Wall Street analysts, large-scale purchases of shares by company insiders can be regarded as an encouraging sign for the US stock market, writes [The Financial Times](https://www.ft.com/content/72442478-1759-4ac2-8d7c-bf0382997af9) . And that's why.

"Wait and see" game
-------------------

According to David Giroux, portfolio manager at T Rowe Price, historically active insider buying is considered "a pretty sure sign of a market bottom." “Insiders make it clear that they do not expect large-scale changes and there are really good buying opportunities,” the expert explains.

One of the most striking examples was the deal with the securities of the Starbucks coffee shop chain. In May 2022, Howard Schultz purchased $15 million worth of Starbucks stock (Schultz returned to the company in March 2022 as interim chief executive). This was the first insider purchase of Starbucks shares since August 2018, according to VerityData. Since the beginning of 2022, the corporation's stock quotes have fallen by about 35%.

Vladimir Shmunis, co-founder and CEO of RingCentral, a corporate communications services provider, spent $1.2 million to buy shares in his firm, the first such deal since the company went public in 2013. In 2022, RingCentral securities fell by more than 60%.

Ben Silverman, head of research at VerityData, was expecting “more intense buying right now,” especially in S&P 500 stocks. He recalled that “in March 2020, no one had any idea how the next two years would turn out.” However, in the spring of 2020, at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, purchases were more active. And now, according to Silverman, S&P 500 company insiders are acting the same way they did in the first quarter of 2022: playing a "wait and see" game.

{{< ads >}}

In April 2022, according to Verity, there were 272 insider sellers and 32 buyers from S&P 500 companies. In mid-May 2022, the ratio changed slightly to 225 sellers and 42 buyers. According to analysts at JPMorgan investment bank, despite the partial withdrawal of retail investors from the stock market and fears associated with an economic slowdown and recession, "corporate insiders hold a non-consensual opinion in most sectors and actively buy out the fall."

Earlier, Barron's reported that insiders from mid- and small-cap firms were the most active buyers. Back in April 2022, there were 388 sellers and 105 buyers from companies that are included in the Russell 2000 broad market index. In May, this ratio changed dramatically. There were 327 insider sellers from small and mid-cap firms and 395 buyers.

If we take a segment of seven days, then only in one week ending May 17, 2022, 281 buyers were registered (this is the maximum weekly figure since the week ended May 19, 2020).

Even more promising, Silverman says, is the new buyer-to-seller ratio of 2.8 to 1. Typically, the average is between 0.7 and 0.8 per year, meaning there are more sellers than buyers. If current levels continue, May 2022 will be the first month for Russell 2000 when there are more buyers than sellers (since March 2020).

“We would like to see this number continue to rise, or at least not drop significantly. Historically, we've seen buying volume either stay the same or build up for three to five weeks before the market hits bottom,”  Silverman [notes .](https://www.barrons.com/articles/insiders-trading-stocks-51653335228?tesla=y)

{{< ads >}}

With hope for the best
----------------------

Since the beginning of 2022, the S&P 500 index, one of the main indicators of the state of the US market, [has decreased](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-23/insiders-put-recession-angst-aside-to-binge-on-their-own-stocks) by 12.8%. Market strategists differ in their forecasts regarding the value of the exchange indicator for the entire 2022. This is due to the fact that it is not yet clear how supply chain problems, the next introduction of quarantine measures in China, the policies of the US Federal Reserve System (US Fed) and geopolitical factors will affect corporate activity. It is possible that the worst for stocks is yet to come.

The investment bank Goldman Sachs [believes](https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/24/goldman-sachs-says-the-selling-wont-stop-until-this-happens.html) that the fall of the markets will continue until the US Federal Reserve, which acts as the country's central bank, does not abandon the tightening of monetary policy. However, in March 2022, inflation in the United States reached 8.5% and became the highest in the last 40 years. And under these conditions, there are no signs for a change in monetary policy aimed at curbing consumer price growth, according to CNBC.

Amid high inflation, billionaire Ray Dalio, founder of the world's largest hedge fund Bridgewater Associates, is advising investors to stay away from cash. At the same time, he believes that stocks are an even more risky investment. According to Dalio, the best investments are "assets with real returns" such as real estate, energy and infrastructure.

Nevertheless, the attitude of corporations to their own securities inspires optimism. It 's not just insider buying that is on the rise, according to [Bloomberg .](http://www.bloomberg.com/) Firms are also spending more money to buy back their own shares. Since January 2022, US companies have announced plans to purchase $666 billion worth of securities, which is 19% higher than the planned volume for the same period a year earlier, according to research firm Birinyi Associates.

{{< ads >}}

“This is reassuring,” [said](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/23.05.2022/insiders-put-recession-angst-aside-to-binge-on-their-own-stocks) John Carey, managing director and portfolio manager at Amundi Asset Management. “Companies are confident enough in their business to put more money into it. We will see if this trend continues and if insider buying continues. But overall, it's a positive sign."

As famed financier and investor Peter Lynch once said, “insiders can sell their stock for many reasons, but they only buy it for one reason: they think the price will go up.”

_Sources: The Financial Times, Barron's, CNBC, [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/)_

**Author:** *Kira Galkina*