---
title: "Work-life balance is the main cause of burnout: Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella"
description: If you try to keep work and home separate, you risk burnout, warns Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella. About what habits help a businessman protect himself from the "disease of the XXI century" and remain energetic
date: 2022-06-11T16:52:01+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T16:52:01+08:00
images:
- fesG1LM.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Stephen Brashear / Getty Images'
authors:
- Ekaterina Brusentseva
interest: health
channel: 
- healthy lifestyle
- business guru
tags: 
---

“My father was an economist and a Marxist. And my mother was a professor who studied Sanskrit drama. With great difficulty they could agree on something, and this gave me the opportunity to form my own opinion, ”this is how Satya Nadella talks about what influenced him as a person. The businessman was born and raised in India and, like almost any resident of the country, was a fan of cricket, even played in the school team. He did not become a professional, but this sport taught him an important quality.

“My strength is the ability to notice my weaknesses every day. Just like everyone else, I have self-confidence and an ego, but I'm not afraid to admit my mistakes and become better, ”he said on the Finding Mastery podcast. That's what the coach of his high school cricket team was talking about. Any player on the field makes mistakes, but it is important that he does not dwell on failures, but learns from them. And each time he returned to the field confident that he would perform well.

In an interview with David Rubinstein, Nadella admitted that he was not at all ambitious as a child. He wanted to stay in his native Hyderabad, study economics or politics, work in a bank and play his favorite cricket. But his father insisted that his son study as an engineer, and then get an education in the United States. It turned out that this was a useful decision both for the career of Satya Nadella, who now heads Microsoft, and for his health. In India, he began to smoke. But in Wisconsin, where he studied, it is cold in winter: it was easier to quit a bad habit than to freeze, dragging on a cigarette.

{{<ads>}}

About morning rituals and empathy
---------------------------------

Mother from childhood taught Satya Nadella to awareness. She always tried to live in the present and drew her son's attention to what was happening around him. Therefore, Nadella tries to approach each of her actions in this way. He even called the process of writing his book Hit Refresh (“Press “Refresh”) “a meditation on the difficult decisions that a leader needs to make.”

The main mindfulness habit of the head of Microsoft is a minute of gratitude in the morning. He adopted this practice from the famous psychologist Michael Gervais. The idea is to wake up, take a deep breath in and out, put your feet on the floor and "ground": to feel what is happening here and now. And then you need to find something for which you are grateful to the world, and set a goal for the day. Just a few simple steps make Satya Nadella feel good. And a charge of vivacity gives him a morning run or a half-hour workout in the gym.

Satya Nadella talks a lot in his interviews about empathy - this is his key quality as a leader and person. He calls it a source of innovation, because "until you put yourself in the shoes of the buyer, you will not be able to understand his unspoken wants and needs," and therefore succeed in business. Empathy is not an innate quality, but a skill that needs to be learned, the businessman believes.

Nadella himself did not have him for a long time. When he first got a job at Microsoft, he went through many hours of interviews: he solved complex mathematical problems, wrote code, built algorithms. Everything was going great, but on the last question he stumbled. One of the managers who conducted the interview asked, "What would you do if you saw a child fall in the street." Nadella was confused: “They probably want to hear from me about some kind of computer algorithm, but they didn’t teach me that!” After a few minutes of thinking, he finally answered that he would have called 911. The manager then got up and walked towards the exit, signaling that the interview was over. And already at the very door he said: “When a child falls and cries, you hug him and comfort him.” This was Nadella's first lesson in empathy.

{{<ads>}}

But the turning point for him was the birth of his eldest son, Zane, who was diagnosed with cerebral palsy. At first, Nadella could not accept this at all and kept asking: “Why did this happen to me?” And then he realized that nothing had happened to him - it was his son who needed help and support. So he managed to put himself in the place of Zane and “turn on” empathy in himself.

About work-life balance
-----------------------

Satya Nadella tries to be a conscious parent. “When I am with children, I always ask myself: am I really here now or am I thinking somewhere else? I don't always succeed \[being involved\], but I try really hard. And it energizes me and gives me a sense of satisfaction in order to return to work with renewed vigor,” Nadella shared in an interview with the Australian Financial Review.

When he is at home, he does homework with the children, and he also likes to cook something tasty for the whole family. His favorite dish is the traditional Indian biryani. This is rice with meat, vegetables and many seasonings. According to Nadella, it takes a whole day to prepare, but the result is worth the effort.

{{<ads>}}

The head of Microsoft does not like the phrase work-life balance, the concept of harmony between these two important parts of life is much closer to him. If you strictly separate the office from the house, this will not protect you from burnout, Nadella is sure. He considers the main reason for the “sickness of the XXI century” to be the fact that we are used to contrasting professional activity with our hobbies.

“I always thought that I needed to find a balance between leisure and work. But now I'm trying to change the equation to create harmony between personal interests and the position of CEO, ”Microsoft CEO explains his position. One example of how Satya Nadella achieves this is his commitment to making Microsoft products accessible to people with different needs. In particular, the birth of Zane was the impetus for the development of artificial intelligence for visually impaired consumers. It recognizes emotions and tells users exactly what others are feeling. And thus helps them to adapt in society.

“Why am I staying at Microsoft for almost 30 years? Because I've learned to use the company as a platform to bring ideas to life that I'm truly passionate about. This gives meaning to the work, and meaningfulness relieves tension, ”concludes Satya Nadella.

_Source: Time, The New York Times, Hello Monday, Finding Mastery, Intelligence Squared, ABC News, Australian Financial Review, The Wall Street Journal._

**Author:** *Ekaterina Brusentseva*