---
title: "Not “McDonald's”, but “Just him”: how to change the brand for companies leaving the Russian Federation"
description: The business that Western companies leave in Russia when they withdraw their brands from it is looking for new names. They often make the audience laugh. But this is not the main problem. About what difficulties await new old brands in the Russian Federation - Alexander Izryadnov (Vinci)
date: 2022-06-08T07:31:53+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-07T18:31:53+08:00
images:
- bPwiPuJ.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Alexander Izryadnov
interest: marketing and advertising
channel: 
- venture industry and startups
- stock
tags: 
---

The Russian network "McDonald's" chooses a new name. Among the latest registered options are "This is it", "Exactly it" and "Compass". Other companies with less big names have already changed their signs in Russia: L'Occitane has become L'Occitane, Reserved has become RE. And Ernst & Young and PwC completely left the association with parent companies: now it is the Center for Audit Technologies and Solutions - Audit Services and Trust Technologies.

What awaits the renamed brands and how will consumers meet them? It will depend on whether the company can handle the following.

1.  Keep the association with the old brand in the name or involve customers in renaming? For example, the Cropp brand has already turned into CR, and Deloitte came up with a name where the first syllables of words add up to Deloitte - Business Technologies and Solutions. But the options that McDonald's is now thinking about do not correlate with the previous brand.
2.  Build new brand awareness through marketing and public relations.
3.  In communications, tell about the local team and the expertise of the Russian office.
4.  Engage in the promotion of top managers and publish market analytics to emphasize the company's expertise.
5.  Work on building an HR brand.
6.  Do not put off launching campaigns for a long time.

The connection with the old brand in the name certainly helps its recognition, but the main factors for the success of the updated business are still reputational work and product quality. If the cheeseburger stays the same delicious and the service is fast, then the customers will not care if it's McDonald's or Fun and Tasty. Yes, now new names cause a lot of ridicule, but this is a temporary phenomenon. As soon as the news ceases to be news, everyone quickly forgets about it.

{{< ads >}}

Therefore, the name change itself is not the main problem of renaming. At the forefront here are questions about how not to lose the trust of the audience and the understanding that the updated brand has retained international experience and pre-sanction quality.

Not only a name
---------------

If you abandon the old brand with a worldwide reputation, you will actually have to build a reputation from scratch. And this process is very labor intensive.

First of all, the updated brands will face strong competitive pressure from Russian companies, which are now in a more advantageous position - they already have some sort of, but well-established image. For this reason, although rebranding is a rather urgent measure for many today, work on creating a new name and “face” of the brand should be as deliberate as possible. It largely depends on whether the business can retain customers in the country.

As a result, the renaming itself is not so important: everything that follows it is important. And this is a whole reputational work.

Companies with a Western background that start operating in Russia under a new name should first of all broadcast:

*   that they are still on the market, and the quality of services remains the same;
*   that the team did not collapse (because there were few foreigners in the state, and all leadership positions were occupied by citizens of the country);
*   that the business is in good hands.

For the last point, you need to talk about top managers: publish columns about their background and achievements, give expert comments. And of course, a must-have is to conduct industry research and bring the results to the audience: this will not only emphasize your expertise, but also help stakeholders understand where the market is heading.

Another important point: for many clients of companies that left the country, the international format of the enterprise was a key factor in their choice. And without a reference to the London office in preparing the strategy, the brand risks losing its former value. Therefore, it is now important for such players to be told that their expertise has always been concentrated in-house: in the Russian office and in a team that is still strong.

{{< ads >}}

New Constants
-------------

Building the reputation of a new brand not only helps retain existing customers, but also launches word of mouth that brings new audiences to the company. And it is important that the people to whom you are recommended by buyers already know something about the brand - then they are more likely to follow the advice.

All this works for the HR brand. For applicants, Deloitte and Business Technologies and Solutions are actually two different employers. In order for new specialists to come to you, you need to convince them that you are just as reliable, offer good conditions and interesting projects, and cooperation with you will be a good item in your resume.

To create such a reputation, you need to make a lot of effort: actively engage in the product and tell the audience about your work on quality. And it doesn't have to be a short-term campaign: It can take at least a year for customers to "recognize" a brand.

Thus, it will soon become clear to everyone what work the same McDonald's did in its time to build itself as a brand. So, the concept “That's what I love” concerned not only dishes, but also the interior, packaging, service, and choice of locations. Almost every restaurant in the chain had children's zones, designed to emphasize the concept of "family", and the culture of service in the corporation is given a huge role. And in order to keep this concept, the new owners will have to maintain the quality of all these components.

It is very difficult to repeat this. Brands like McDonald's or Nike were a kind of constant for people, and now this support is lost. But a company that manages to become a “new pillar” for the consumer will be able to regain its place in the market.

And finally, another important point: brand building should be done right now, and not postpone the campaign until the fall. Unfortunately, many of the revitalized companies are doing the opposite, cutting the costs of marketing and PR and cutting staff. Such a tactic will certainly lead to the loss of customers. And then it will be very difficult to attract new ones: people will go to competitors, and they are unlikely to let them go.

**Author:** *Alexander Izryadnov, co-founder of Vinci Agency*