---
title: "How to identify your strengths and talk about them in an interview"
description: More than 45% of employers consider it appropriate to ask an applicant for an initial position about his strengths. When hiring future managers, we are talking about 60%. So that the question does not take you by surprise, prepare in advance. How — explains Anahit Emin (UNITY)
date: 2022-06-08T01:41:04+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T01:41:04+08:00
images:
- dEnUXJP.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Unsplash'
authors:
- Anahit Emin
interest: self development
channel: 
- career
- instruction
tags: 
---

Step #1. List Your Accomplishments
----------------------------------

In a calm environment, remember and write down examples of all your achievements and successes that you are proud of in life. They can refer not only to professional results, but also to your hobbies, relationships with people outside of work, volunteer projects, etc.:

*   fulfilled the sales plan in a difficult economic period;
*   began to study French and in six months was able to read a great work of art;
*   mastered the basics of programming in courses and independently got a starting position in the field of IT;
*   organized a mom support group to help and exchange information between women who are looking for work after a long maternity leave.

Do not let thoughts of your shortcomings and defeats interfere with your internal monologue - this is a separate topic for reflection. Think of yourself as a harmonious and happy person who wants to understand what he does best. Talk in a positive and kind way towards yourself.

Step #2. Understand what is behind success
------------------------------------------

Look at these examples and ask yourself, “How did I achieve these successes? What personal qualities helped me? Answering these questions will give you the key to understanding your strengths.

Write down opposite each of the achievements the qualities and skills that helped you achieve high results. For example:

*   analytical abilities and the ability to quickly process information helped to master a new computer program in the shortest possible time;
*   strong communication and persuasion skills helped organize the volunteer project and get people interested in participating in it;
*   perseverance and perseverance contributed to the achievement of indicators at work, despite many external barriers.
{{<ads>}}
Step number 3. Highlight the main thing
---------------------------------------

At a meeting with the employer, you will not need to start a long story, describing in detail what (what) you are good for. It is enough to name 3-4 strengths and give short examples that illustrate them. Brevity is important because lengthy discussions can leave a negative impression on the interviewer. The candidate throws in examples, hoping that he will create an image of a self-confident person and will bypass the rest of the applicants for the vacancy, but from the outside it may seem to the interviewer that he is simply boasting or exaggerating. How do you know what to focus on?  
  
Ideally, the strengths that you will talk about at the interview should highlight the following in you.

### 1\. Individuality.

What qualities clearly characterize, distinguish you from others, move you forward, to new victories? Remember what your friends and colleagues say most often. People are unlikely to say “you are easy to communicate with” or “you explain well” if this is not at all the case. It is much better for a recruiter to be remembered by showing his uniqueness than to speak unsupported by examples of banality about stress resistance and developed communication skills.

### 2\. Compliance with current trends.

The challenges of the time set trends in the personal qualities that companies look for in candidates. For example, the top popular soft skills include three skills.

**Empathy and emotional intelligence.** The ability to understand the feelings of others, empathize with people and build communications, focusing on the emotional state and character traits of the interlocutor, are important skills that will help you win over clients and colleagues.

Companies need empathic employees, because the ability to work with emotions (one's own and others') will create a favorable climate in the team and achieve high results in the team. Empathy has come to the fore in recent years because, in the aftermath of the pandemic, employers have become even more focused on the mental health of employees. Large companies replenish their staff with corporate psychologists, connect such an option as remote psychological assistance to VMI policies. As an example of the manifestation of empathy, a candidate can talk about active participation in charitable projects, creating support groups on social networks and instant messengers, organizing free consultations where he shares his professional knowledge.
{{<ads>}}
**Creativity** . The widespread introduction of artificial intelligence threatens to obsolescence and the disappearance of a number of professions (for example, self-service checkouts replace cashiers in stores). Routine functions are automated, and complex tasks often require creativity. In favor of the creativity of representatives of creative professions (for example, designers, copywriters) their portfolio can speak. For those whose work is not related to the creation of something new, it is worth giving an example of a non-standard solution to the problem. For example, a recruiter can tell in detail how he was looking for a candidate for a difficult job, using networking opportunities, finding recommendations through groups on social networks.

**Learnability.** The desire of specialists to acquire new knowledge is highly valued by employers: industries are developing and the requirements for training specialists are changing. You need to improve your skills without dropping out of the work process. To make sure that the candidate really does not stand still, at the interview he may be asked what new he has learned over the past year. Useful knowledge can be drawn not only from online course programs, but also from professional literature, the media, forums, webinars - the applicant can refer to these sources of information.

### 3\. Compliance with the requirements of the position and the specifics of the company.

Consider whether the interviewer agrees that your strengths will help you excel at work. So, empathy is important for a sales manager who needs to read the emotions of the client and adapt to his mood. But for a payroll or HR specialist, this quality is not so significant, and it would be more logical if the candidate talks about the attentiveness and perseverance, thanks to which he processes large amounts of data.

Tips - what the employer expects from you - can be found not only in the job description, but also on the company's website - in the news block and the section that describes the values ​​and mission of the enterprise. They will help you determine the cultural code of the company, understand if this employer is really right for you and what kind of person can fit into his corporate culture.

**Author:** *Anahit Emin, Head of Recruitment Group at UNITY HR Company*