---
title: "Baidu: how the main Chinese search engine differs from Google"
description: Google is the world’s top search engine, but only 3% of the population in China uses it. The leader here is Baidu. And in order to be in the top lines of the search, you need to play by its rules. About them - TexTerra agency (leads the EnterChina project)
date: 2022-06-12T02:11:16+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T02:11:16+08:00
images:
- sJ5lXnK.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- TexTerra
interest: Marketing and Advertising
channel: 
- internet marketing
- instructions
tags: 
---

If you have optimized your site for Google, you might think that optimizing your site for another search engine, in particular Baidu, is not much different. But it's not. How is Baidu, the main Chinese search engine, different from Google?

Hosting
-------

Some countries, such as the US, lead the hosting market. Therefore, if a site is registered in the .com domain zone, its place in the search results increases in any country. This is the reason why many site owners host their sites on .com. However, if you want to get a good position on Google in a particular country, such as France, then you should buy hosting from that country.

In the case of Baidu, this rule is even stricter - you need to place the site on Chinese hosting, this greatly affects the search results. In addition, the pages of a site hosted in China load faster, which is important for user experience (UX).

The only disadvantage of hosting in China is the slow loading of a site "located outside" the country. These issues usually do not occur with Hong Kong hosts, as many of them are optimized for both Chinese and international traffic.

{{<ads>}}

Baidu is more like Yandex than Google
-------------------------------------

{{<info>}}
_Ilya Gorbachev, Rocket Agency Managing Partner_

“All the differences between promotion in Baidu and Google are based on how China works, because Baidu itself was born there - it accounts for 79.52% of the Chinese search market, and Google has only 3.04%, according to StatCounter. Perhaps Baidu is much closer to Yandex than to Google. This manifests itself both in the fact that it can still take into account the contents of the Keywords meta tag (and therefore it cannot be spammed with keywords), and in the fact that the Chinese search engine is not able to correctly process JavaScript content (Google has more or less it turns out).

Another interesting difference is that Baidu does not react in any way to link attributes like nofollow, and therefore, the usual link building strategies here need to be looked at from a different angle. And, of course, in the case of Baidu, it is important to focus on links from official government resources and services of Baidu itself (for example, the Baike encyclopedia).”
{{</info>}}

ICP license
-----------

Creating a website and submitting it to the Google index is relatively simple. Some domain names are restricted, but anyone can buy a .com or .net domain. In the meantime, to register in China's .cn domain, you need to obtain an Internet Content Provider (ICP) license from the Chinese government. To do this, you will need a registered business, either with a Chinese license or a recognized foreign one.

Please note that without an ICP license, you will not be able to connect your site to a Chinese hosting provider.

Censorship
----------

The Baidu search engine has a list of words blacklisted by the Chinese government. When writing text, make sure you don't use them. The state censors certain sites and types of content, so Baidu only indexes pages that meet its requirements.

{{<info>}}
_Konstantin Kalinin, CEO Raddy.com_

“Google is believed to block certain types of content. But in most cases, sites that appear in search results are not censored. So, we can see pages with pornographic content and scenes of violence. Chinese censorship is considered an important part of the Internet. Bypassing it in the case of Baidu will not work. Sites that do not meet the requirements of censorship will not appear in the search results.
{{</info>}}

{{<ads>}}

Site layouts
------------

Baidu can mix paid and organic search results, unlike Google, which clearly separates them. And the brands that pay for Baidu's ads always end up at the very top. This place is called "Baidu brand zone". Sometimes such paid listings can take up the entire first page of the search results, which makes the search engine look bad - there is a lot of information that is not quite the same as the user requests, and even with a lot of branded links.

Meta tags
---------

At the beginning of its existence, Google paid great attention to meta tags, but over time, their influence on positions in search results has noticeably decreased. Baidu hasn't gotten around to it yet, and its meta tag optimization (including keywords) is very different from Google's. Therefore, remembering the "old times", write in the code all the meta tags, Title and Description. At the same time, make them unique.

Keep in mind that Keywords tags count towards Baidu's rankings and can be up to 200 characters long (Title tag up to 80 characters, Description tag up to 200 characters). Also, keep in mind that Baidu considers inactive links to be active, so they also affect rankings.

Domain and subdomain
--------------------

Google doesn't differentiate between domains and subdomains as long as they have quality content optimized for search. In the case of Baidu, you should not use subdomains if you want to convey something important to the audience. Short domains in China are not honored.

A good site name is one that contains not only letters, but also numbers. The fact is that numbers in China have a symbolic meaning - for example, "good luck", "prosperity", etc. For the Chinese, this is important.

{{<ads>}}

Languages
---------

To write a Russian-language site optimized for Google, it is enough to hire a competent copywriter or marketer. To write competent landing pages that will rank highly in the Baidu search results and be correctly perceived by visitors, you will have to turn to the services of professional linguists. Hieroglyphs can have multiple meanings, and there are no spaces between "words" in China. We do not recommend using online translators and search engine translations, as the result may be incorrect and even terrible.

Unique content
--------------

Google provides good positions for sites with original content - this is one of the reasons why users trust the search engine.

Baidu is also strict about website content. If you want to promote a page, it must contain a unique text that includes at least 300 words (hieroglyphs).

If your content has been stolen, then you may have problems with duplicate content in Baidu - these should be addressed immediately.

Website adaptation for smartphones
----------------------------------

Google has a high speed of opening pages from mobile devices. As for China and Baidu, mobile devices are the main portal to the Internet for users. 99.7% of the country's citizens use smartphones to access the Internet. Websites that are not mobile friendly will rank low on Baidu. Therefore, it is vital to think over the design for the mobile version of the site.

{{<ads>}}

Baidu speaks Chinese
--------------------

{{<info>}}
_Konstantin Kalinin, CEO Raddy.com_

“Baidu recognizes Chinese better. Therefore, most of the content on the site should be presented on it. Tools for analytics and statistics collection in Google and Baidu are almost identical. In this case, there will be no problems. At the same time, backlinks are equally important for both systems. These nuances should be taken into account when creating a site or promoting it.
{{</info>}}

Key Findings
------------

{{<info>}}
_Nikolay Beschastnov, PR manager at Logrus IT_

_“_ In terms of promotion, Baidu is very similar to Google, but its ranking algorithms are more liberal due to underdevelopment. Now the algorithms that were used in our country several years ago, including keywords, work well there.

The main feature is state regulation. China has very strict censorship. Baidu is completely subordinate to her. This justifies a number of requirements. For example, the site must have an ICP license. This is a special permit issued by the Ministry of Industry and Telecommunications of China. For a commercial site, a license can only be obtained if there is a legal entity registered in the territory of the PRC. On the main page of the site must be the name of the company in Chinese. Otherwise, you will not be able to access a number of Baidu services.

Baidu was created in the image and likeness of Google. Therefore, it has a number of similar services. First of all, this is Ziyuan - an analogue of Search Control. This is the main tool for SEO. It is used to index pages. The initial indexing of a site is slow and can take up to a month.

It is very important for Baidu that hosting is located in China. First, due to this, the server response time is reduced. Secondly, the Chinese search engine has more confidence in Chinese resources.

When registering for many services, you will have to contact technical support services, and here it is important to remember that email in China is ineffective - it is viewed less often than messages in instant messengers and social networks. Therefore, do not count on a quick solution to problems during registration.
{{</info>}}

**Author:** *TexTerra Agency (leads the EnterChina project)*
