---
title: "Seven phrases of the financial director, undermining the credibility of him"
description: The CFO is one of the key figures in the company. He must be a reliable partner and initiate change. However, it is difficult to find a true professional. Natalya Kuznetsova (Unicon Outsourcing) on ​​phrases indicating that CFO should be changed
date: 2022-06-08T08:18:09+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T08:18:09+08:00
images:
- 1JNtuE5.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Natalya Kuznetsova
interest: Finance
channel: 
- recruitment
tags: 
- unicon outsourcing
---

“Accounting is needed only by external inspectors: tax, banks and investors”
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

About 20 years ago, accounting was indeed far from management accounting, and many enterprises kept two parallel sets of data. Entering data into different systems and reconciling information from them took a lot of time for a whole group of employees, and automation did not always cover all the pains of the business. Now, even in the so-called gray-black companies, management accounting can and should be based on accounting.

The task of the financial director is to set up accounting so that the set of information in the primary documents contains the maximum of data necessary for management. This is the cost center (cost center), and expense items, and the name of the projects, if the company maintains them, etc.

The financial director should always be ready to explain the discrepancies between accounting and management reports, because it is accounting that is built on primary documents, confirmed by signatures and seals.

“Our fact deviates from the plan by 50% and more. What, someone else doesn’t?”
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Poor planning is a consequence of an incorrectly built system of task distribution within the team and poor control over their execution.

First, many non-financial departments perceive the work on the plan as something imposed, which must be done without delving into it too much, if only the management is behind. Secondly, if the quality of the project and its execution are not monitored (read, if there is no punishment or encouragement for this), then the final result will indeed have significant deviations.

In order to avoid significant deviations from the plan, the financial structure must be clearly built in the company. It usually includes a financial responsibility center (FRC), a planning center (PC) and a cost center (cost center). At the same time, all departments involved in the planning process must be motivated to achieve their targets.

{{< ads >}}

“Working with receivables is the task of the commercial department”
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Of course, it is the job of the commercial director to control the timely payment of the company's services by clients, but the financial director must determine the maximum allowable amount of receivables for the organization. Each company has its own.

The task is to make sure that accounts payable are no more than accounts receivable. Or arrange work with receivables, so that money from customers comes faster and there is no need to borrow money. In general, the more receivables will prevail over accounts payable, the better.

If necessary, the CFO may consider insuring receivables. 

In addition, the tasks of the CFO include the timely entry of data on the receipt of funds to the company's accounts so that the commercial director receives information promptly.

{{< ads >}}

“The less the specialists who work in my subordination, the better”
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Of course, any leader wants excellent specialists to work for him, who, at the same time, do not require high salaries. However, in reality this does not happen.

The main task of the finance department is to provide the company with high-quality management information and streamlined operational processes, such as payroll, payment for vendors, etc. Failure to properly fulfill these responsibilities creates financial and reputational risks for the business.

Therefore, the issue of team formation should be approached in detail. The CFO should not artificially reduce the cost of staff. It should define the set of features that are really important to the business. If the finance function is not outsourced, it should include at least a chief accountant and an economics department. If the company is large, then the financial department (treasurer and lending) is removed from the accounting department. The accounting department should have at least three people, and they should be interchangeable in case of illness and dismissal. The salary of a chief accountant in Moscow starts from 150 thousand rubles, an ordinary one - from 50 thousand rubles. The head of the economic department earns from 70 thousand rubles.


{{< ads >}}

“I have been working here for the third year, but I have never gone home on time. I go on vacation with my work phone and laptop. All my subordinates also work until nine in the evening.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The task of any leader, including the financial director, is to build processes so that subordinates work efficiently and have time to complete tasks during working hours. When employees are constantly late at work, this means that the manager has an “eternal fire”. This occurs in the absence of clear workflow schedules and the distribution of responsibilities: who, what, for whom and in what time frame does.

A professional financial director knows how to manage his time and the time of the team. In general, he must build processes in his department in such a way that the team works without his presence, because his main task is the strategic development of the function, and not operational activities.

"The strategy is for top managers, the financial director is only an executor"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The task of top managers and shareholders is to set goals, and the CFO is to draw up a detailed action plan on how to reach this goal. But this does not mean that the financial director is only an executor and only carries out orders issued from above. The task of the CFO is to offer options for how the company can achieve strategic goals, as well as initiate changes in strategy. For example, he may offer to optimize costs by building an internal control system. The duties of the financial director also include building up work with receivables: preparing the necessary reports, organizing regular committees on receivables.

“The first step is to automate financial processes”
---------------------------------------------------

First of all, it is worth automating accounting, because for the most part it is a routine process, errors in which are fraught with fines. The company should be automated payroll, accounting and tax reporting. 

Automation of management accounting and budgeting can only be started when you are sure of the volume, the principle of calculating indicators, methodology and organization of processes. Otherwise, automation will be a waste of employee time and money. Accounting for many business processes can be kept qualitatively in MS Excel, provided that employees have sufficient skills for this.

**Author:** *Natalya Kuznetsova, CFO of Unicon Outsourcing*