---
title: "Lost decade: how Deutsche Bank got out of a protracted crisis"
description: The German giant Deutsche Bank has been on the verge of disaster more than once in recent years - it has survived a series of scandals and many years of losses. But in 2022, the bank reported its highest quarterly profit in nine years. Here's how to fix the situation
date: 2022-06-08T08:07:40+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T08:17:40+08:00
images:
- 4gXVYqv.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Spencer Platt/Getty Images'
authors:
- Olga Kiseleva
interest: management
channel: 
- world business trends
tags: 
---

The last ten years have been one hell of a nightmare for the mastodon of the financial sector of continental Europe, Deutsche Bank. It is the only one of the world's 25 largest banks that has suffered losses since the economic collapse of 2008-2009. At the same time, many of its competitors have managed to [receive](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-05-25/how-deutsche-bank-avoided-bill-hwang-s-archegos-risk-under-ceo-christian-sewing) more than $100 billion in profit during this time. Over the decade, the value of the shares of Germany's largest credit institution with more than 150 years of history has fallen by 65%, assets have decreased by 30%, and revenue has collapsed by 25%. Two former Deutsche Bank bankers served prison terms for involvement in financial fraud. Some of the former board members are still under investigation.

Over the past ten years, the bank has raised €19.5bn of new capital, suffered cumulative losses of €10bn and revised its development strategy five times. In addition, Deutsche Bank paid more than €14 billion in fines and entered into agreements as part of investigations into interest rate manipulation, securities fraud, money laundering on behalf of Russian clients and tax evasion.

However, in April, Deutsche Bank reported a record quarterly profit in almost a decade - € 1.2 billion. Revenue for the first quarter of 2022 amounted to € 7.3 billion. As the bank [noted](https://investor-relations.db.com/files/documents/quarterly-results/2022/Deutsche_Bank_Q1_2022_Media_Release.pdf) , "this is the highest value since the first quarter of 2017." In the same month, the bank completed its first share buyback program in 16 years. Everything looked as if the German giant had finally managed to overcome the decade-long crisis. RBC Pro tells how scandals almost led Deutsche Bank to disaster and how the bank managed to rectify the situation.

{{< ads >}}

It's not yet a crisis
---------------------

Deutsche Bank's problems began with the global financial crisis. Until 2008, the bank did not end the year with a loss for more than half a century. It was trusted as an organization with an impeccable reputation. At first glance, Deutsche Bank survived the crisis better than its competitors. Thus, WestLB was divided and sold, the largest bank in Germany in terms of the number of clients, Postbank, had to raise financing through the issuance of shares. A number of financial organizations turned to the state for help. Among them was Hypo Real Estate, the second largest commercial real estate lender.

At the same time, Josef Ackermann, then CEO of Deutsche Bank, proudly asserted that the lender did not need state bailouts, unlike Germany's second largest private bank, Commerzbank, which had to be bailed out by the authorities.

In 2012, Paul Achleitner, a native of the German insurance company Allianz, was appointed head of the supervisory board of Deutsche Bank. He oversaw the activities of the bank's senior management and was responsible for all important business decisions. Then it turned out that things were not going so well for the bank. So, several former colleagues of Ackermann said that during the global financial crisis, Deutsche Bank hid € 12 billion in losses from derivatives operations. If the bank correctly displayed the information in the financial statements, then it would have to turn to the state for help. As early as 2013, Deutsche Bank admitted that it needed additional capital. At the same time, for the first time, they started talking about his possible bankruptcy. However, the bank successfully raised funds in the next few years and remained afloat.

In 2015 and 2016, Deutsche Bank was again at the center of scandals. So, for participating in an international conspiracy to manipulate the interbank LIBOR rate in April 2015, the bank was fined $ 2.5 billion, and the international rating agency S&P downgraded its credit rating from the highest level A by three steps at once, to BBB +. At the same time, during stress tests, it turned out that Deutsche Bank still did not have enough money. At the end of 2016, for the first time since the global financial crisis, the bank reported a net loss of almost €7 billion. Against the backdrop of existing problems, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) called Deutsche Bank the most serious source of risk to the financial system among international systemically important banks.

Then other problems of the bank surfaced. In particular, the regulators found out that even before the 2008 crisis, the bank was conducting fraud with mortgage securities. Thus, according to the US Treasury, in 2006-2007 the bank misled investors when trading these instruments. In this case, Deutsche Bank [paid](https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/deutsche-bank-agrees-pay-72-billion-misleading-investors-its-sale-residential-mortgage-backed) a $7.2 billion fine in 2017.

In 2017, the bank was accused of money laundering. According to media reports, so-called mirror transactions were used for this: a financial institution bought a certain block of shares on the Russian market for rubles and immediately sold a similar block of shares in London for dollars. Thus, about $10 billion was withdrawn and legalized from Russia. The bank was fined more than $600 million. 

{{< ads >}}

In 2018, a new blow to the reputation of Deutsche Bank was dealt by an investigation into a case initiated in connection with the publication of the so-called Panama Dossier (a series of publications based on documents from the offshore registrar Mossack Fonseca. - _RBC Pro_ ). It was about money laundering. Bank offices were searched. According to the investigation, two employees of the largest German bank were involved in illegal transactions, and Deutsche Bank did not report suspicious accounts to the authorities.

Because of the endless scandals, other banks and financial institutions refused to work with the creditor as a counterparty. This led to a deterioration in the financial position and increased concerns about the long-term prospects of Deutsche Bank. In 2015, the bank's net loss amounted to €6.7 billion, in 2016 - €1.4 billion, and in 2017 - €735 million.

At the time, Autonomous Research co-founder Stuart Graham thought Deutsche's fortunes were "impossible to fix." Later, however, he retracted his words and admitted that his verdict was "very unfortunate".

And yet, the position of Deutsche Bank was so deplorable that in 2018, the German payment system Wirecard, created in 1999, bypassed the 150-year-old bank in terms of capitalization. At the same time, Wirecard's turnover was only 5% of Deutsche Bank's turnover. The peak of the bank's financial problems came in the second quarter of 2019, when the net loss reached €3.15 billion, although the bank had a profit of €401 million a year earlier, and revenue [fell](https://www.db.com/news/detail/20190724-deutsche-bank-reports-net-loss-driven-by-transformation-charges-in-the-second-quarter-of-2019?language_id=1) by 6% year-on-year, to €6.2 billion.

"There is no plan"
------------------

Achleitner tried to improve Deutsche Bank's position by reshuffling the top management of the bank. As part of the announced reorganization in 2015, he appointed John Cryan, a native of the Swiss UBS, to the position of CEO of the bank. The new leader has taken a number of measures in order to return the former stability to the credit institution. In particular, the bank sold the insurance company Abbey Life, a 20% stake in the Chinese bank Hua Xia Bank and part of the branches in Poland. Deutsche Bank also reduced the size of non-core assets by selling the port terminal management company Maher Terminals USA and a stake in Red Rock Resorts. “What the bank lacks is sound leadership. It seems that there really is no plan, ” [criticized](https://fortune.com/2018/04/09/deutsche-bank-ceo-john-cryan-christian-sewing/) then organizing a banking professor at the University of Hohenheim Hans-Peter Burghof.

Experts began to blame the Achleitner bank for the problems. “He has been running the bank since 2012 and, as it turns out, made a lot of bad decisions. He should be responsible for this and leave. I don’t believe that this will happen, but that’s exactly what I would like,” [said](https://fortune.com/09.04.2018/deutsche-bank-ceo-john-cryan-christian-sewing/) Andreas Meyeru, asset management manager of the investment company Aramea Asset Management, in 2018.

The measures taken by the bank's CEO Cryan over almost three years helped to reduce losses, but Deutsche Bank never returned to profit. Therefore, in the spring of 2018, Achleitner replaced Cryan with Christian Zewing, who has worked at the bank since 1989 and previously served as deputy general director.

The new CEO took a drastic cost-cutting course and made several bold decisions that helped stabilize the bank's financial position. “The period after the global financial crisis has indeed become a lost decade for investors in German banks. But the new creditors' restructuring plans are more ambitious than previous ones and address years of problems. For the first time in a long time, they really have a chance to achieve good profitability, ” said Florian von Hardenberg, a [UBS](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-05-25/how-deutsche-bank-avoided-bill-hwang-s-archegos-risk-under-ceo-christian-sewing) banker who advises German lenders on strategic issues.

In early 2019, Sewing turned down an offer to merge Deutsche Bank with German rival Commerzbank. He justified the rejection of the deal by saying that "it will not provide sufficient benefits to offset the risks, restructuring costs and capital requirements associated with such a massive integration."

Deutsche Bank also reduced the size of its investment arm. To do this, he transferred to the French BNP Paribas divisions specializing in electronic securities trading and primary brokerage services.

{{< ads >}}

In addition, Sewing engaged in the restoration of the bank's financial position, without applying for an injection of new capital. To do this, since 2019, he got rid of non-core assets in the amount of € 367 billion. JPMorgan analyst Kian Abu Hossein called the measures taken by the bank "comprehensive and bold."

As part of the restructuring, Deutsche Bank announced the reduction of 18 thousand employees (about 25% of the total staff). As Zewing argued, this was "the most difficult and painful of all the restructuring decisions." Employees were upset and wondered who would be fired. “The mood in Deutsche is depressing. People know that the bank is doing badly. Now there is no time for fun, ”said one of the employees on the day the CEO announced the upcoming reduction.

Zewing also carried out reshuffles in top management. In particular, the head of the investment division, Garth Ritchie, resigned. The CEO of the bank called the measures taken "the most fundamental transformation" of the bank in recent decades. “This is a reboot,” he said. Against the backdrop of the details of the restructuring in the summer of 2019, the bank's shares rose in price by 15%. “This is a risky maneuver, but if successful, it will help the bank get back on track,” said one [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/) source close to the bank’s shareholders at the time.

Achleitner, in turn, admitted that he did not initially understand the depth of the Deutsche Bank crisis. He thought that since the bank weathered the global financial crisis relatively undisturbed in 2008-2009, it meant that it had become “the only European lender that got a chance to play in the global league.”

Apparently, the measures taken by Zewing are working. Since the beginning of 2020, the bank has been steadily recording quarterly profits. Deutsche Bank managed to get out of the vicious circle of losses. Interestingly, Wirecard, which had previously surpassed the bank in terms of capitalization, suffered a completely different fate. In 2020, she declared bankruptcy.

In November 2021, the international rating agency Standard & Poor's upgraded the bank's credit rating, it said that thanks to the restructuring, "Deutsche Bank's financial performance and management have improved."

In the spring of 2022, Deutsche Bank reported that at the end of 2021 it received the highest profit in ten years. According to the financial statements, net income quadrupled year-on-year to €2.5 billion. Deutsche Bank achieved strong financial performance not only from its investment division, but also from its corporate banking and retail divisions, which have long time remained unprofitable. “Deutsche Bank has made significant progress in recent quarters. The main thing is to make sure that the gains are sustainable,”  [said](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-05-25/how-deutsche-bank-avoided-bill-hwang-s-archegos-risk-under-ceo-christian-sewing) former senior German central bank official Andreas Dombreth.

Investors seem to have believed in the measures taken by Zewing, as evidenced by the dynamics of the value of the bank's shares: now their value is 55% higher than the figure that was recorded on July 7, 2019, that is, the day the restructuring was announced by the new CEO.

“Now Deutsche Bank is profitable,” said Citi analyst Andrew Coombs. In his opinion, the question is not whether Deutsche Bank can make a profit, but how much profit the bank can make. According to analysts, net profit attributable to shareholders will grow by 73% in 2022, to €3.4 billion, and then continue to grow and [approach](https://www.ft.com/content/06158598-daa0-4560-b072-a57bcbd7697c) €5 billion by 2025.

However, Deutsche Bank may not have solved all the problems yet. On the day of the financial statements for the first quarter, the value of the shares of the credit institution [fell](https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/deutsche-bank-cost-target-becoming-more-challenging-sewing-says-1.1764409) by 6%, and just two days later, law enforcement agencies raided the bank's offices in connection with an untimely report of money laundering. In May, at a general meeting of shareholders, Zewing announced that it would be more difficult for the bank to meet its cost-cutting targets in 2022 due to a special operation in Ukraine, a logistical crisis, currency fluctuations and much higher inflation overall. All this means that the bank has yet to convince investors that it has finally turned the tide.

**Author:** *Olga Kiseleva*