---
title: "James Bond and 4 other types of candidates who are not liked by HR"
description: HR specialists sometimes have to conduct hundreds of interviews to close one vacancy - and it is not certain that the selected candidate will accept the job offer. HeadHunter found out which candidates are the most difficult to work with and how they deal with it
date: 2022-06-12T13:20:24+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T13:20:24+08:00
images:
- aa0w2db.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer'
authors:
- headhunter
interest: hr
channel: 
- career
- instructions
tags: 
---

Type One - "Big Shot"
---------------------

In the cover letter, he refers to his acquaintance with the CEO, is added as a friend on social networks and downright insists on a meeting! But this powerful networking may be just a front. Of course, connections and a wide circle of acquaintances are never superfluous. But what if, apart from exchanging business cards at conferences, the candidate has nothing really to offer?

The story of Denis, a recruiter for fintech projects: “The director of business development persistently asked me to meet. There was no such position in my work, but I try to get acquainted with promising candidates, so I accepted the invitation. To my surprise, the candidate could not give a single clear example of a business result, he turned all the time to processes, difficulties and a bad team. I collected reviews on him - the company in which he worked at that time closed its representative office in the Russian Federation due to low payback. For me, this is the best illustration of the “successful experience” of the candidate.”

**What to do:** check for effectiveness and not succumb to the veil of power.

Type two - "Soap bubble"
------------------------

The resume is replete with the names of well-known companies, but work experience rarely reaches one year, and there is no special promotion: the position of a specialist changes to a similar one, the list of tasks differs only in prepositions. Such a candidate likes to make a lot of noise out of nothing: the specified projects for verification turn out to be strangers, the results are team, and completed tasks are the achievements of the manager or colleagues.

{{<ads>}}

Sergey, the head of the sales department, says: “I have a rule - to check the recommendations for everyone who comes to my team. Usually I ask not only for the contacts of the head, but also for a couple of key clients or colleagues. It was very funny when one of the candidates bragged about getting the N team involved and negotiating with the CEO. I know both the company and this leader well. But they couldn’t remember such a manager.”

**What to do** : Conduct competency-based interviews and carefully check references.

Type three - "Accident"
-----------------------

Gaps in experience are explained by difficulties in the labor market, the illness of relatives and the global crisis. He is interested in work, but he is in no hurry to pass the selection: “Can we reschedule the meeting? I got sick”, “I’m taking the cat to the vet, I just don’t have time.” And even if such a candidate still receives a long-awaited offer, the unexpected can happen...

Marina, HR manager: “We hired a supervisor in the sales department. The candidate received the car and money under the report on the first day and disappeared. He drank, he walked, he crashed his car ... they searched for him for a week, they frightened him with the police through his mother.

{{<ads>}}

**What to do** : such candidates are more common in mass selection for ordinary positions. If something confuses you in the applicant, there is a whole list of "buts", it is better not to risk it. Compromises in hiring usually don't do any good.

Type four - "Corporate trickster"
---------------------------------

Easily passes interviews and tests. He manages to fall in love with everyone who was with him in the room for more than five minutes. Listening to the story of his career achievements, the recruiter simply does not believe his luck: he achieved, completed, implemented, automated, attracted - all by himself, and all ahead of schedule! But do not delude yourself: the "corporate sly" has enough skeletons in the closet. Perhaps he knows how to find interesting ideas, but he does not know how to implement them. Or he is waiting for a foreign visa, and this offer is just a "transshipment base", nothing more ...

Maria, head of the contact center, says: “At the end of the interview, the young man began to wink at me and say that the main thing is that I take him - we will agree on the rest ...”

**What to do** : Take your time with hiring, have a few meetings and clear up any inconsistencies. Even the most skillful lie is manifested in small things: you should be very attentive to them.

Type five - "James Bond"
------------------------

Professional, with excellent references and extremely unapproachable. Often found among developers, digital marketers and other digital age favorites. Why is he so disliked by HRs? Yes, because he chooses from 5–10 offers, he can drastically change his mind, cancel a meeting, fall out of love with a project. For his hands (and head) you have to fight with other colleagues (read: competitors), quickly make appointments and talk about the vacancy like a sweet-voiced siren. And do not stop searching, even if the offer is accepted, the first working day has passed, or the trial period has ended. Because this expert knows his worth. And although there are no irreplaceable, there are unique ...

**What to do** : real professionals do not fall in love with salary, social package and corporate parties. Only an idea can conquer them. If you love your product or service, if you clearly understand your uniqueness and value for the market, there is a chance for reciprocity. Therefore, we study the materiel and learn to argue.
