---
title: "Filling instead of vacation: how prices for dentistry will change this year"
description: Of all areas of medicine, dentistry is perhaps the most in demand and at the same time the most import-dependent. Sanctions can hit patients hard
date: 2022-06-05T07:50:07+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-05T07:50:07+08:00
images:
- ufxROl0.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Maurizio Gambarini / dpa / TASS'
authors:
- Daria Salnikova
interest: management
channel: 
- modern management techniques
tags: 
---

Dentistry is an indispensable branch of medicine: according to [a survey](https://old.wciom.ru/index.php?id=236&uid=10759)VTsIOM, 72% of Russians complain about the condition of their teeth or gums. The “punitive dentistry” of the Soviet era with gray falling out fillings and anesthesia used only for tooth extraction is a thing of the past: consumers have long been accustomed to contacting clinics not only for medical, but also for aesthetic services. But because of Western sanctions, the specter of the past has reared its head. Large manufacturers of equipment and materials, such as the American giant 3M, began to leave Russia, international logistics sank. According to the unanimous assessment of the interviewed experts, the share of imported materials and equipment in the private dental sector is up to 90%. RBC found out from dentists and prosthetists how things are with the supply of materials and prices, and what are the forecasts for the next year, whether we can afford high-quality treatment.

From Russian - only teeth
-------------------------

In March, news about the sanctions sowed panic in the market, recalls Maxim Kopylov, head of the MaxTreat Maxim Kopylov Periodontal Center clinic. Suppliers could not clearly answer whether they remain on the market or leave. Purchase prices instantly increased: for implants made in the USA and Switzerland - twice, and for some types of goods - even about three times. For example, powder for professional oral hygiene of the Swiss company EMS instead of 2700 rubles. began to cost almost 11 thousand rubles, Kopylov gives an example. “Anesthesia “Ultracain DS” (Sanofi, Germany) cost 6500 rubles. for a package of one hundred ampoules, and now 13 thousand rubles, and one patient takes up to seven ampoules, depending on the procedure being performed. Emax ceramic blanks (Ivoclar, Germany) cost 5800 rubles. for a pack of five pieces (10-12 veneers can be made from one pack) - now 9500 rubles. Duo-Link, a cement for fixing ceramic restorations (Bisco, USA), cost 8500 rubles, now 14 thousand, silicone for taking impressions Zetalabor (Zhermack, Italy) was 2200 rubles. — became 7 thousand,” shares the numbers Bekzod Ganiev, CEO of the Moscow clinic LEDS-Esthetic Functional Dentistry.

“Prices were raised by all suppliers - some with apologies and explanations, some silently: “We are in the market, if you don’t like it, don’t take it.” And the purchasing power of businesses fell at the same time as the purchasing power of the client, ”says Dmitry Smirnov, dentist, chief physician of the Studio32 clinic. Nevertheless, clinics stocked up to the best of their ability: according to Smirnov, on average, stocks of familiar materials and consumables will be enough for his colleagues until the fall, or even until the end of the year. “As soon as we noticed the first signs of change, we made the largest purchase in the history of our clinic and managed to acquire many positions before the price increase. Usually our clinic kept stocks for at least a quarter. This time, a week before the first sanctions, we began urgent purchases for six months or a year. In March 2022, we spent twice as much than in the most costly months of 2021 - about 20 million rubles. for consumables and tools. And that's not including equipment. For example, in March we also bought a microscope worth $55,000,” says Kopylov.

{{ ads }}

Implant or car
--------------

Patients also fussed, providing clinics with a spring surge in demand, for example, in the Intan network of implantation and dentistry centers (27 clinics in St. Petersburg) in March it amounted to 20%. Those who planned long-term treatment, for example, implantation, in which it takes several months for the implant to take root, and only then a crown is put on it, often went to the clinic with a desire to pay for work and materials in advance, thereby fixing the price for themselves, says Smirnov .

“Dentistry competes not only within its own industry, but also with neighboring industries. This is tourism, the purchase of luxury goods and other non-essential items, the cost of the automotive industry. And these industries are now feeling unstable,” explains Artem Koltsov, managing partner of the Intan network and the project for the production of aligners (systems for correcting bite. - _RBC_) "Teleporto". “In March and April, we observed the choice of the consumer in favor of dentistry: patients spent their savings on health, although they planned to use the money for other needs: vacation, car, etc.” Therefore, according to Boris Bernatsky, an implant dentist and head of the Queen Nella dental clinic, clinics should prepare for a decline in the number of requests for aesthetic services - those who were worried about this have already gone to the doctors. In the second half of the year, patients will come mainly with acute pain and for scheduled examinations.

Clinics, of course, raised prices. According to the assurances of their leaders, not by much, lagging behind the growth in the cost of materials, so as not to lose customers. Some services, Smirnov complains, have to be completely abandoned: even with the increase in tariffs, they have become cheaper than their cost, for example, some types of bleaching. In mid-March, his Studio32 clinic raised the price list by 15% from the prices of January last year. In the Intan network, the increase was even less. “In the cost structure, the cost of materials is from 10 to 15%. In order for dentistry to be able to compensate for them, it is enough for it to raise prices for services by only 10%, even if prices for materials double, Koltsov clarifies. \- We indexed prices, predicting the growth of the currency in the future - we increased them by only 5% compared to the previous period.

Further rise in price during the year will be insignificant, Ganiev is sure. “Prices will no longer be able to critically rise - purchasing power also dictates its terms. And in economy-class clinics, there will even be a slight reduction in prices for a number of services in order to attract customers in a competitive environment.” In his clinic, the cost of implantation and installation of ceramic veneers has increased by 20%, while tooth extraction, caries treatment and installation of braces are still the same as before. Vera Mazurova, Chief Specialist in Dentistry of the Medsi Group of Companies, believes that prices will remain at the same level for three months - promotional offers for the installation of implants and professional oral hygiene are possible, but then everything will depend on the geopolitical situation .

Among the suppliers of materials that have completely left Russia is one of the world leaders, the American 3M. Deliveries were postponed by such companies as the South Korean Osstem Implant (the fourth largest manufacturer of implants in the world), the Swiss Straumann (dental implants, instruments, biomaterials, orthopedic components, digital equipment, transparent aligners), the American Ormco (one of the largest manufacturers of orthodontic products - brackets). systems, microimplants, instruments, filling materials, etc.) and Dentsply Sirona.

{{ ads }}

Belarusian drills
-----------------

As often happens in Russia, after the normalization of the ruble exchange rate, if the prices for equipment and consumables have decreased, then not all, not everywhere, and not to the previous level. “Distributors tell purchasing departments over the phone that their rate is like this today. Prices change every day, but not as much as at first,” Ganiev states. Suppliers are still trying to sweeten the pill. “Today we are offered many filling materials at a promotional price. We bought something even cheaper than before, thanks to special offers,” says Yegana Marufidi, CEO of the Stolitsa clinic.

In a more advantageous position are dentistry, which used equipment and materials from Asian manufacturers. According to Smirnov, at mass-market clinics, from 60 to 75% of suppliers were Chinese companies, for which logistics has only become more complicated and more expensive. Fortunately, in China there are analogues of any equipment and consumables, experts admit. The rest, having bought for half a year, are waiting for the secondary import chains through other countries to be established. “So far there are only single offers, which we look at with caution, because there are a lot of counterfeit products in dentistry, and we are trying to trace the supply chain so that it is clear that these are originals. And if the chain is gray, they can bring anything,” explains Smirnov.

All elite suppliers of medical equipment today would like to cooperate with Russia in the same way, Ganiev argues. According to him, the producers themselves do not consider it necessary to leave the country - they do it under pressure. There is no official ban on the import of dental products from the United States: it only applies to air travel. Therefore, suppliers themselves begin to master the path of “Belarusian shrimp”. “We are currently purchasing another installation from Germany, manufactured by the world leader. It’s just that it will not be delivered directly, but in a roundabout way, and it will take not a month, as before, but three, ”Marufidi comments. Equipment from Finland to Russia was no longer delivered, but Italy sends the same CT scanners to the Intan network as before. “There are no problems with the supply of intraoral scanners. Now we are waiting for several of these from Korea,”

Some of the companies that announced they were leaving had already changed their anger to mercy: at the end of May it became known that the manufacturer of “invisible” caps for straightening Invisalign teeth, the American company Align Technology, would supply materials at least for those who had already begun treatment, comments the head of the clinic "Capital". Most European manufacturers remained in Russia altogether. “The medical industry is not subject to sanctions. In addition, the Russian market is one of the largest and most profitable for suppliers, especially when it comes to implantology. The Europeans will not want to lose him so easily,” explains Bernatsky.

In the near future, the Russian dental business will be very willing to make friends with the CIS countries, Ganiev is sure. “Our business is waiting for friendship with Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan. They will help us with official distribution. Dental equipment from Japan and South Korea is already being delivered through Uzbekistan. Theoretically, Georgia and Belarus could do this, but Georgia, although positively inclined towards us, is still a pro-Western country, it will not help in the current situation. And Belarus will not be able to help even with all the desire, because the sanctions have affected it too. But a collapse in this niche is not expected, ”the doctor is calm.

Clinics themselves monitor the market, looking into new countries for themselves. “We have added a budget line of Brazilian implants,” says Marufidi. — They have proven themselves well in the local market, our colleagues shared with us the results of their observations. And we have already begun to apply them in our practice.”

{{ ads }}

Leave no teeth
--------------

Russia also has its own manufacturers. Some developments can compete with recognized global brands. “Fagodent preparation is successfully used in surgical periodontology. We actively use Russian products for treatment and disinfection "Multicide" and "Dezcliner", we recommend to patients mouth rinses "Multicide", we use Russian-made injection dental needles and sterile materials (napkins, surgical clothes, masks). There is also a mini-laboratory in our clinic, in which we use Russian equipment from the Averon plant in Yekaterinburg, ”Kopylov lists.

Most Russian medicines, dental implants, materials for bone grafting, some types of filling materials are competitive, says Vera Mazurova. “For some technologies, we are already 90% working with Russian materials,” she notes. “For example, our aligners for bite correction are mostly domestic.” According to Mazurova, Russian manufacturers of dental consumables are now loaded three to four months in advance, and capacity is expected to expand by August-September. There are no problems with anesthetic solutions: all production cycles, starting from Soviet times, have been adjusted so that they can be easily modernized, which is happening right now, explains Ganiev.

However, it will not be possible to quickly switch to domestic analogues. First, doctors and patients do not trust Russian production. Secondly, many of the domestic pharmaceutical companies are still dependent on Western raw materials. For this reason, for example, Technodent, which was engaged in production in the Belgorod region on the territory of the Severny industrial park, temporarily suspended its work. “In the next five to seven years, waiting for some kind of replacement by Russian manufacturers is absurd. Too complex equipment, too complex materials - we simply do not have the specialists and capacities for this, ”Smirnov is categorical. For example, adhesive materials for veneers and, in general, the production of any orthopedic structures cannot be quickly replaced. Russian materials perform their direct function, but do not provide a predictable sustainable result, Kopylov notes.

In a word, it is rather not about the unavailability of services, but about their quality. There is another problem that will begin to affect not now, but in a few years. “Our doctors flew abroad to improve their skills, foreign specialists came to us to present new methods, equipment and international schools. Now all this has become much more complicated,” recalls Smirnov. — But foreign suppliers and doctors are very friendly to Russian dentists. Now they are trying to transfer theoretical training online.”

**Author:** *Daria Salnikova*