---
title: "Why do you need candidates from other industries - 5 reasons to hire them"
description: 'Candidates from other areas of business are able to work wonders - bring new ideas, increase sales at times, change business processes and strategy. But when hiring people "from the outside" it is important to consider some points. What and why, HeadHunter found out by interviewing HRs'
date: 2022-06-14T23:56:16+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-14T23:56:16+08:00
images:
- qMU6QZk.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- headhunter
interest: hr
channel: 
- recruitment
tags: 
---

1\. Opportunity to attract talent
---------------------------------

“In my practice, I often met company executives and business owners who sincerely believed that their business had “special industry specifics”, so only candidates with knowledge of the industry market were invited to vacancies,” the director of organizational development and personnel management of the Group of Companies gives an example. Rusconsult" Natalya Garshina. “This conviction has closed the door to many talented candidates.” In fact, knowledge of the market in which the business operates is of great importance only for candidates applying for key positions.

**Case** : The company was looking for sales managers. “I conducted 800 interviews, and I was lucky to find six specialists, including the head of the sales department,” Kirill Marin, head of the company, entrepreneur, shares his experience. All were from completely different areas. One girl was previously engaged in the sale of cars. The other came from the catering industry. The third is from the telecommunications sector (sold packages for media channels). There were also experts from advertising and marketing.” Kirill assessed how each of the candidates speaks, his voice, gestures, how he delves into, is being introduced into the product - he did not look at the experience of the candidates, but looked for the necessary abilities in them.

Any knowledge about the product can be brought up in a maximum of a month and a half, the main thing is the talent to sell. With intensive training, a person can become a good specialist who knows the specifics of the industry, and it is almost impossible to teach how to sell.

“I have ten years of experience in managing startups and launching projects,” says Kirill Marin. — And I think that the ability to sell is one of the most difficult skills in terms of ability. When a person enters the industry, he undergoes training, adaptation, immersion in the pace of work, mentors and mentors are assigned to him, but if he does not know how to sell, then he will not sell.

{{<ads>}}

2\. New business ideas
----------------------

Quite often, candidates from other markets are not only not inferior to the “natives” of the industry, but also surpass them in a number of criteria. Moreover, often candidates from other markets bring unexpected ideas that the luminaries did not come up with. And it really moves the business forward.

Often people get tired of working in one area - the eye is “blurred”, the routine absorbs every day. The transition to a new industry, to a new business area becomes an impetus for development for them - everything is interesting to them, they are full of ideas and enthusiasm.

Sometimes an employer is purposefully looking for people from other, related industries. “I selected editors for a young digital media outlet that writes about agribusiness,” career consultant and recruiter Anastasia Zentsova gives an example. \- So in my application it was written "candidates from the agricultural segment are not considered." Such a paradox! It's simple: the usual style of presentation, the standard approach to finding and selecting materials from industry experts did not fit into the concept of the new edition. We needed candidates with experience in editing, independent writing of articles, knowledge of digital technologies and no more.”

For another project, the company was looking for a candidate with experience in digital media, but Anastasia persuaded the hiring team to look at the person with the radio. As a result, he did an excellent job with two test tasks and was hired, where he still works.

3\. Increased efficiency of the sales force
-------------------------------------------

“In my opinion, industry specifics take no more than 20% of the candidate’s total knowledge,” comments Natalya Garshina. “Everything else is a set of hard and soft skills that are necessary for the successful completion of the assigned work.”

One example is the position of a sales manager. The company where she joined as HR director had a strong tradition of only hiring candidates with market experience.

{{<ads>}}

Sales executives sincerely believed that their “special market” for health products was beyond the reach of a person who previously sold consumer goods, building mixes, or food products. Not to mention that candidates without sales experience were not considered at all. This situation was reversed after the revision of the system of education and professional retraining. This made it possible to attract talented and motivated candidates from other markets and even without experience in sales. It was they who increased the level of sales in the company - and largely due to the fact that they had not yet managed to earn burnout from many years of monotonous activity.

4\. Implementation of changes in the company
--------------------------------------------

People from another market are simply necessary if a company has developed a “top-level” strategy, and for its implementation it needs a middle management team that has successful experience in implementing a similar or as close as possible comparable strategy.

“In this case, attracting such candidates will be the most successful solution: the company receives qualified and highly loyal “ambassadors of change,” says Igor Kiselev, change management expert, business coach. “And their experience will give the maximum effect for realizing the goals of the company, for introducing innovations.”

5\. Opportunity to upgrade the team or get a new team
-----------------------------------------------------

If the company's management wants to change the vision and strategy (for example, due to the need to develop new channels, enter new markets, or partially or completely diversify the business), we are talking about attracting top-level specialists from another market. At the same time, such a candidate is expected to have unconditional expertise in this issue, the ability to be a generator of changes and a leader in their implementation.

Often, the desired bonus to such an applicant will be his ability to bring a management team with him or to upgrade the existing team by redistributing powers and responsibilities.

### How to competently select candidates from other markets and make them effective

1.  Find out the true motivation of the candidate.
2.  Discuss communication with the candidate.
3.  Ask candidates questions about past work experience.
4.  Have an introductory conversation.
5.  Assign a mentor to the newcomer.

Analyze, plan and make your choice consciously - and then the candidate you attracted will be the very “fifth element” that will take your business to a new level.