---
title: "How to create a business for a former employee and not be disappointed"
description: The competition for a place in the sun has intensified. There are few opportunities to find a dream job. Those who already have ideas think about their business. Anna Sverdlova (Consulting practice “Geran and Partners”) - about what delusions they first need to overcome
date: 2022-06-12T23:06:47+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T23:06:47+08:00
images:
- Cd55Wxd.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Pexels'
authors:
- Anna Sverdlova
interest: self development
channel: 
- career
- instructions
tags: 
---

1\. “Own business brings pure pleasure”
---------------------------------------

We eagerly read inspiring success stories of famous entrepreneurs. And we empathize when we learn about their failures. But at the same time, it is difficult for us to imagine how we would behave in the place of this person, what we would feel in conditions of great uncertainty.

In fact, other people's mistakes are instructive. For example, in 2021, the American media vied with each other about the dismissal of 900 employees of Better, a young company specializing in home loans. The bad news was reported to the staff by the company's CEO Vishal Garg, and he used Zoom for this, and even chose the "good" time - shortly before Christmas. The layoffs attracted the attention of journalists and, according to CNN Business, caused the company (No. 1 in the list of top startups, according to LinkedIn 2021 and LinkedIn 2020) to postpone plans for an IPO. This case is notable because, just a few months later, Vishal Garg publicly admitted the unethical nature of the way he addressed people.

Owning a business is not a path strewn with roses. This is a world in which you are forced to make difficult decisions every minute. The advantage is that you do it yourself and are personally responsible for the consequences. The right decision is great, the wrong one is something to work on. And this is a super drive when, if not everything, but a lot is in your hands.

2\. “My own brand works for me, not my employer’s brand.”
---------------------------------------------------------

You leave the corporation and naively believe that you will be able to use the connections you have built over the years. You start calling and are surprised to find that if earlier the brand of the company you worked for immediately attracted the interlocutor to you, now you are left alone. Nobody is behind you. Nobody knows you. You are just one of many.

{{<ads>}}

In your new capacity, reputation needs to be earned from scratch. The feeling of disorientation intensifies when you communicate with old acquaintances, and for some reason they are no longer eager to make deals with you and conduct common business, although your potential has remained the same. You need to build your superbrand and rebuild relationships.

3\. "My employment will decrease compared to employment in a corporation"
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Working for a corporation, you were very busy. The list of responsibilities, especially when an employee is responsible for several areas and a large number of regional offices, is really very large, as is the amount of information that needs to be kept in mind. An employee works 40 hours a week. An entrepreneur works much harder. According to a study by the prestigious international resource Crowdsping, 30% of entrepreneurs work 50-59 hours a week, almost 20% work more than 60 hours. The difference is impressive, isn't it?

This workload of entrepreneurs is not surprising, since they have to learn many skills from scratch. For example, the skill not to get into situations where you are not paid even if you have a contract. It is necessary to understand the numerous nuances associated with bookkeeping (even when hiring a professional, this cannot be avoided); urgently find the right specialists in all areas; consider how to avoid the risks of a cash gap, study changes related to currency legislation and regulator initiatives. And you literally drown in all this routine, forgetting about weekends, holidays and, of course, vacations. Business becomes your whole life.

4\. "The scale of the activity is not so important"
---------------------------------------------------

In fact, it only seems to be. The first thing you face when working in a small business is the lack of involvement in something big, as happens when working in large companies. Before, even the smallest task gave the feeling that you are contributing to something “great”. Now everything is different, all your attention is focused on everyday things. Comparing the scale of the tasks, you come to disappointing conclusions. Don't worry, this is temporary. You are able to turn the tide and be involved in initiatives that you could not even dream of before.

5\. “I will easily find the right specialists or grow them within the company”
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Staff is a headache, especially for small businesses. After all, you want to have ready-made professionals within a rather limited budget. But even if there are no problems with the budget, professionals for some reason, all other things being equal, will choose a corporation, and not you (even today, in a situation of significant staff cuts or freezing vacancies). A large company is prestigious and stable, and many start-ups are alarming. A paradoxical situation arises when you, and not the applicant, must explain at the interview why you should choose your company and offer numerous bonuses.

{{<ads>}}

Another misconception is that you can recruit young people with no experience and “customize them for yourself” so that they fit your corporate culture. This works primarily in large companies that can afford turnover. In a small business, each person is an indispensable link in the overall process, too much is tied to him, and if he leaves, there is a big risk of violating obligations to customers.

Small businesses cannot afford to hire young professionals financially: although at first glance, the cost of remuneration may seem lower, in fact, university graduates cost significantly more than experienced employees due to their low efficiency. They need to be assigned a mentor who will check and correct their work, and these are additional costs plus what an experienced employee can do in a week, a young employee will do for several months.

6\. “My loved ones will unconditionally support me in a new status”
-------------------------------------------------------------------

It's no secret that businessmen are under a lot of pressure from all sides. These are financial obligations that must be met regardless of the economic situation, and the need to make hundreds of decisions every day - from finding a new office to achieving a balance between work and personal life, and the need to communicate with a huge number of people, including not very pleasant ones. Misunderstanding on the part of friends and relatives is also, unfortunately, an integral part of the new status, one of the most discouraging. The success of your business will be doubted, they may even condemn you in a situation of severe turbulence and economic transformation. After all, after building a career in a prestigious company, you have moved into the category of an entrepreneur with ghostly prospects.

It happens that interests with the former social circle begin to diverge. And the family - the most important source of inspiration and support - for some reason is in no hurry to give them to you, not sharing your desire to work for yourself. At the same time, relatives, paradoxically, are driven by love: it seems to them that doing business from scratch is stress, constant time pressure, and lack of days off. When you are trying to get on your feet, starting your own business, it is very important to have those around you who believe in you and help you.

According to statistics provided by the consulting company RosExpert, 30% of American entrepreneurs suffer from chronic depression caused by their professional activities; 29% of business founders experience permanent anxiety; 72% of businessmen note the presence of any psychological problems.

So how do you stop the misconceptions listed above from influencing your life and building a successful company?

Tip #1: Accept that entrepreneurship is the next step in your professional life
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To begin with, simply realize that a new stage has begun in your career and life. There is no need to compare it with the corporate period and with what was before it. This is a completely different experience, and going into entrepreneurship, especially in the current conditions, is most likely a one-way ticket. It gives you the opportunity to feel both incredible freedom and responsibility for yourself and your team, but at the same time, you will have to start a lot from scratch and as you think is right.

Tip #2: Only Invest in Relationships with Clients Who Can Value Your Investment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Your investment in customer relationships in a small business does not always pay off in the same way as in a large company. For example, at the dawn of our activity, we conducted a project for a company that specialized in design using new (at that time) BIM technologies. We wanted to demonstrate our other capabilities to this company, we tried to do more than we should - what is called pro bono. It seemed to us that in this way we invest in relations with the client and then we will be able to offer him other services already on a contractual basis in the future. As a result, we were faced with the fact that much of what we did far beyond the contractual relationship very quickly began to be taken for granted by our client.

The main lesson we learned from this is that the client must invest in the relationship on an equal footing with you. Fans of gratuitous work should be brushed aside.

Tip #3: Hire Experienced Employees with Values ​​Close to Your Company's
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hiring experienced employees with corporate ethics close to the values ​​of your business means creating a reliable rear for yourself and leaving the opportunity to deal with direct responsibilities - think over a development strategy, attract investment for development, enter new markets, etc. Of course, it is very difficult to find such employees, but this is more than a justified investment of your own time and resources for searching. You can afford to organize internship programs with the possibility of subsequent employment a little later, when the business grows and gets stronger.

Tip #4: Be proud of the results of your work, but leave yourself room for mistakes.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Excessive self-criticism and perfectionism, if they don’t drag you to the bottom, will lead to problems like a cash gap or a missed project deadline. By the way, perfectionists should think twice before starting their own business, because mistakes are inevitable. They should be seen as a chance to learn something new and gain experience. However, it is important to strike a balance, that is, not only be proud of your product, but also leave yourself room for improvement. Dissatisfaction with your own results can lead to burnout and other unpleasant consequences that will prevent you from achieving high results.

{{<ads>}}

Tip #5: Form a new social circle
--------------------------------

Form a new social circle by surrounding yourself with experienced entrepreneurs, colleagues, partners. The experience and knowledge of your environment in specialized areas will help you, suggest a solution, and at the same time warn against many mistakes and thus save your time and resources. They will also become an additional source for the formation of a network of contacts (primarily contacts of potential customers). Another important factor is the positive and objective thinking of your environment. In a situation of uncertainty, it is important to look for opportunities and analyze the situation with a plus sign, rather than focusing on negative aspects. At the same time, it is important not to lose a sense of reality and quickly respond to changes. The latter can lead to unexpected positive results.

Tip #6: Live in the present, but don't forget about strategy
------------------------------------------------------------

You need to live for today, while not forgetting about strategic planning. We cannot turn a blind eye to current issues that require a prompt response. At the same time, you should not miss opportunities - it is important to see them in time, and for this you need to be proactive and be able to adapt. The pandemic and the events of recent months have perfectly demonstrated the importance of these qualities. By the way, they can and should be developed. Understanding the prospects for business development, capturing new trends is a competitive advantage that increases sustainability not only in calm times, but also in times of turbulence.

Tip #7: Find inspiration outside of business and strive for mental resilience
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mental and psychological stability is the measure of success. Constant stress sooner or later makes itself felt, so in addition to business, you need to have some other interests. This allows not only to distract from pressing problems, but also to look at them from a different angle. Hobby in this case is not a luxury, but a necessity. It is equally important to be able to "let go of the situation", not perceiving failures as bad luck. Without optimism and the ability to switch off from the process, even if only for a few hours, a small business cannot survive.

{{<ads>}}

Tip #8: Learn to treat yourself with a certain amount of irony
--------------------------------------------------------------

No one canceled a sense of humor. The most correct thing that an entrepreneur can do is to “educate” healthy self-irony in himself. Without this - nowhere in the conduct of negotiations. He joked, inserted an appropriate quote - he melted the ice. Humor and irony sweep away barriers and open even the most complex locks. Often this is an innate gift, but if you are not lucky, then there are a great many courses, master classes and trainings to develop a sense of humor and self-irony.

**Author:** *Anna Sverdlova, co-founder, managing partner of Geran & Partners Consulting Practice*