---
title: "Find and neutralize: what to do if a manipulator comes to the interview"
description: According to the psychology of lying, deceit is a form of disguised manipulation. Mastering the manipulation for applicants today is not difficult. What are the dangers of manipulative employees and how to recognize them at the interview - HeadHunter found out
date: 2022-06-08T02:16:20+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-08T02:16:20+08:00
images:
- YM5wOdc.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- headhunter
interest: hr
channel: 
- recruitment
- instructions
tags: 
---

Usually, manipulators can be recognized, if not at the interview, then during the probationary period, although during these three months the employee can create a fairly convincing imitation of violent activity, and after that it is rather difficult to fire him.

The main goal of the manipulator is to create a favorable image for himself and get money without putting much effort into it.

We will tell you how to recognize such a candidate.

Nonverbal
---------

It is quite easy to mislead with the help of non-verbal communication language: postures, gestures and facial expressions. In any material on how to conduct interviews, it is recommended to smile and act openly. This may be a banal display of politeness, but some signs should be treated with caution.

{{<ads>}}

### 1\. The applicant copies your movements, postures

There is a well-known technique called “tuning”, which is recommended to win over people and increase their confidence. If the applicant is carefully watching you and takes a body position similar to yours, you can directly ask him: are you repeating after me, why are you doing this? It's confusing. The manipulator will either end the conversation or continue doing what they were doing. In this case, you can turn off the conversation.

### 2\. The candidate tries to hide emotions

Most often, manipulators try not to show their true face and use a forced smile for this. Any emotions (sadness, surprise, irritation) will be accompanied by a smile, so take a closer look at her sincerity. Sometimes a smile does not leave the face as a result of strong excitement, but excitement is quite easy to determine by the manner of speech and awkward gestures.

### 3\. The applicant tries to take up as much space as possible

In order to "push" you, the applicant may quietly break through your boundaries, trying to take up more space in order to increase their own influence. To do this, the manipulator bends over the table, as if by chance touches your hands, approaches your face, trying to consider something. Can even get up and walk around the room. Such assertiveness may be useful in a sales manager position, but setting boundaries will help test the true intentions of a candidate: please sit down; I don't like being touched; for a more productive conversation, it will be better if you sit at a comfortable distance for me. The manipulator will most likely ignore your requests, as he has a goal, to which he sees no obstacles. There will be a reason to end the conversation.

{{<ads>}}

Verbalica
---------

In the process of communication, the manipulative applicant will also show the tricks that he read in books on successful negotiations.

### 1\. Persistent belief in anything

In order to “sway” you to his side, the applicant will use such phrases: agree that ..., you yourself know that ..., after all, really ... At the same time, you don’t give any significant and significant arguments from him hear, although he can speak quite beautifully and fluently. It is not at all necessary to agree with the reasoner, and even more so to listen to his lyrical speeches, just interrupt and ask to speak to the point. The manipulator may be picturesquely offended, ask to finish, but remember that at the interview he is primarily a guest.

### 2\. Attempt to find out personal

An unscrupulous applicant, instead of talking about his professional qualities, will ask you personal questions: about your mood, marital status, about how long you yourself have been working in the company. In this way, he hopes to win you over, therefore, of course, you do not need to answer such questions, especially if you feel discomfort from the dialogue.

### 3\. Excessive self-praise

It is unlikely that the manipulator will have specific answers to questions about his achievements, but he can easily ascribe fictitious merits to himself. At the same time, the emphasis will not be on results, but on raising their own professional qualities: if not for me, they would have burned out; Well, of course, the project was successful, because I participated in it. Such boasting is hard not to notice, it is unlikely that such a candidate will be useful for the company.

Catch a liar
------------

What will help to recognize the applicant-manipulator and refuse him in a timely manner?

{{<ads>}}

According to Paul Ekman, an American psychologist, a lie researcher, even if a person has thought through his line of behavior in advance, he still cannot foresee all the possible questions that he will be asked. In addition, the circumstances of the interview may change and the candidate may not have enough cunning and dexterity to get out of the situation.

First of all, a liar is afraid of being caught. Therefore, your polite but persistent attempts to defend your boundaries, returning the conversation to a professional course, questions about any embarrassing moments can bring the manipulator to clean water when he is forced to tell the truth. Or he will only begin to lie even more, showing himself in the most unfavorable light. Such an applicant can simply not be invited to the further stages of selection.

Nicolas Gueguin, a French professor of social and cognitive psychology, writes that engagement is a powerful factor in influencing decision making. Therefore, you should control your involvement in the conversation and keep the purpose of the interview in mind in order to make decisions completely objectively.