---
title: "Loans and deception at Bolt: how $11 billion fintech is collapsing"
description: In 2022, the American fintech Bolt is facing setbacks. The company, which has grown 30 times over the past 30 months, has quarreled with customers and cut its staff by a third. In addition, the media found out that Bolt overestimated its financial performance
date: 2022-06-05T14:22:39+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-05T14:22:39+08:00
images:
- AzrltXv.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Pavel Karasev
- Nick Lukhminsky
interest: investments
channel: 
- venture industry and startups
tags: 
---

Since the beginning of 2022 alone, the American startup Bolt has attracted $355 million in investments and increased its valuation to $11 billion. In just eight years, the company, founded by a 19-year-old student from Miami, managed to raise more than $1 billion from investors and go from a niche crypto wallet to one of the most notable fintech unicorns on the market.

Bolt, unlike the namesake company from Estonia, is not engaged in passenger transportation, but in the creation of a payment infrastructure for those companies that are willing to pay for it. Bolt’s unique proposition is simple: with the help of a startup, paying for an order in a customer’s online store is literally just one click away. Ease of payment increases sales, and convenient checkout and payment of the order, like in large online retailers, attracts small companies.

In the spring of 2022, a black streak began in the history of Bolt. In May, the media [revealed](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/25/business/bolt-layoffs.html) that the company, which announced it was laying off almost a third of its employees, was deliberately exaggerating its success in order to impress investors. Not the last role in this was played by the charisma of the founder of the company, Ryan Breslow. Additionally, journalists noted that Bolt issued loans to its employees, which, after the reduction, they will have to pay within 90 days.

Claims against the company are not only from employees and investors, but also from customers who emphasize the “low quality” of Bolt software and are ready to go to court. Will the startup be able to cope with the crisis?

{{< ads >}}

Not a bad start
---------------

Bolt was founded in 2014 by Ryan Breslow with Barrick Rothschild and fellow student Eric Feldman. Breslow grew up in Miami, where he freelanced websites for small retailers in high school. Also as a schoolboy, Ryan created a non-profit organization that provided golf clubs for children who were not able to purchase them on their own. Breslow entered Stanford in 2012.

Breslow combined his studies at the University with a passion for cryptocurrencies: the future entrepreneur mined bitcoins right in his dorm room. In 2014, he dropped out and founded Bolt with fellow student Eric Feldman. In its first version, Bolt was a crypto wallet, later the company turned into a payment service.

The official website of the company [describes the](https://www.bolt.com/our-story) path to the idea of ​​​​the main product Bolt as follows: “Ryan spent years studying ordering and payment systems in online stores,” and for the first time he encountered a problem that his startup will solve when he freelanced developing websites for small retailers". The first versions of the service offered customers protection from fraudsters when placing an order and provided basic payment functionality.

In 2016, the startup received its first investment: Bolt was offered by entrepreneur Khalid Helyu, who heard Breslow talk about his company at an event at Stanford University. Helyu asked the young entrepreneur what he was going to do if his venture was not successful, and he calmly replied: “Bolt will not fail. Everything should work out because the payments industry is not working the way it should.”

So in the portfolio of Helju, which until that moment had early investments in Uber and Deliveroo, was Bolt. The investor invested $100,000 in the project and introduced Breslow to his friends. Among them was the then US Ambassador to Austria, Trevor Traina. Traina had been active in investing prior to his civil service position, and by the time he met Breslow, he considered himself "experienced in the field."

The authority of Mr. Ambassador Ryan was not embarrassed, and the entrepreneur demanded recommendations from companies in which he had already invested. Surprised by the young man's serious approach to business, Traina decided to introduce Breslow to PayPal co-founder Peter Thiel and LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman. “Inside myself, I laughed: he will either go to the bottom or swim,” Traina later recalled.

Takeoff
-------

By 2018, Bolt had decided which product they wanted to capture the market with. By this point, thanks to acquaintances among venture investors, the startup had received about $22 million and was ready to expand.

Breslow and his team began to offer their customers unique protection against fraudulent transactions. Existing and potential customers at Bolt were told about a unique algorithm for detecting such transactions, which is additionally controlled by a person - to eliminate erroneous cancellations and blocks.

However, no unique algorithm existed, a former employee of the company told The New York Times. At first, the startup's analytics team manually monitored hundreds of transactions per day. They had access to all the information about the payment and who makes it. Thus, it was not difficult to find a person’s profile on the Web, for example, on LinkedIn, and the decision to confirm a transaction was sometimes made based on the analyst’s feelings and intuition. Later, the algorithm did appear.

One of the main criteria that Bolt reported to investors on was the number of retailers using the company's services. And that is why the startup forced employees to approve even suspicious transactions: in this way, Bolt customers would not lose customers, and the startup itself would not lose retailers.

{{< ads >}}

In 2018, Breslow convinced investors that he would soon be able to sell his service to big brands like Guess, and included the proceeds from potential deals in projected revenue. The company also hoped that they would be able to attract the attention of users of the Shopify online store development platform, and then the attention of the site itself, according to former employees of the company. Collaboration with the platform failed and Shopify removed support for Bolt solutions in January 2020.

In pursuit of Bolt performance, it was not always possible to verify the compatibility of the company's software with the already existing infrastructure of customers. But that didn’t stop writing the “loot” on the list of successful deals: The New Tork Times received an internal document in which Bolt management clarifies that if “you managed to start negotiations with a large client, then act as if we already started integration. Such assumptions in the startup were also allowed when fixing the result: for example, on the official website of Bolt, for a long time, the Guess brand was listed as an active client, while in fact the parties did not achieve a result and curtailed cooperation.

Controversial ways of doing business were not new to investors. Representatives of the Tiger Global fund, for example, in preparation for investing in the company, talked to supposedly existing startup clients. Investors were able to find out that outside of the trial period, few were willing to continue using Bolt's services. Tiger Global pointed to over-optimistic forecasts for Bolt's revenue and curtailed negotiations.

From 2018 to 2019, the startup managed to raise about $70 million. The funds raised allowed it to hire new employees who took on the portfolio of Bolt clients. Interlocutors of The New York Times, in particular, note that during this period an automated algorithm for detecting fraudulent transactions and full integration with the infrastructure of most clients appeared.

At the end of 2019, Ryan Breslow, in an investor correspondence, acknowledged that Bolt needed to change its strategy. “We managed to sign a lot of deals, but only a fraction of them will be implemented to the end,” Breslow wrote. According to the entrepreneur, for the further development of Bolt, this approach must be abandoned.

Shenanigans
-----------

In the pandemic 2020, Bolt continued to actively raise funds from investors: in just 12 months, the company received $ 500 million. Against the backdrop of a growing valuation, the company's performance also grew, though only in an interview with Ryan Breslow to the media.

In particular, in internal correspondence with employees, the founder of the company noted that he sometimes overdoes it with positive communication with the media, and as a result, one of the entrepreneur’s interviews came out with a factual error: Bolt allegedly processed more than $ 1 billion in transactions in a year. Breslow later publicly confirmed the error and noted that he tried to correct it even before the time of publication.

In the same year, Bolt was able to enter into a partnership agreement with the Authentic Brands Group (ABG) corporation. The company manages 30 brands, including Forever 21, Lucky Brand and Brooks Brothers. The parties agreed to connect only two brands to the Bolt service, but in presentations for investors, the startup continued to increase its importance, talking about the total revenue of ABG. The situation with the unsuccessful partnership with Guess was repeated: the Brooks Brothers brand was listed as an existing client of Bolt for a long time, while not entering into an agreement with ABG.

In November 2021, Authentic Brands Group came out against Bolt with sharp criticism. The company said the startup was unable to provide a free shipping service that was supposed to be similar to Amazon Prime. Moreover, problems with Bolt's software cost one of the company's brands, Forever 21, $150 million in lost profits. Responding to the claims of a business partner, Bolt noted that ABG was trying to retroactively rewrite the terms of the contract and the whole scandal was started only in order to acquire part of the startup at a significant discount.

{{< ads >}}

Despite the claims, Bolt continued to raise funds from investors, and Ryan Breslow again said that the company's main product will be conceptually changed. In its new iteration, it should become "the main way to pay" for the next generations. Now, instead of creating accounts on the site of each seller, users will be able to pay with all partners of the startup using one Bolt account.

With the change in concept, Breslow urged investors to change the methodology for evaluating his company: now, instead of 250 merchant partners, Bolt's audience amounted to 5.6 million buyers. The venture liked the offer, and the startup first received $333 million in 2021, and another $355 million in January 2022, reaching a valuation of $11 billion. whether they are interested in investing in Bolt, but already at a valuation of $14 billion, but did not receive an answer. “Investors don’t have faith in Breslow or Bolt’s management,” said Ken Smythe, head of Next Round Capital Partners. According to him, the startup today is “a ghost ship sailing in pitch darkness without a captain.”

Layoffs and loans
-----------------

In September 2021, Breslow spoke on his social media about the decision to establish a four-day work week as the standard for working at Bolt for three trial months. At the end of the experiment, the management [reported](https://www.sacbee.com/news/california/article261081112.html) an increase in labor productivity and decided to make the four-day routine a permanent practice.

Another innovation of Bolt was the issuance of loans to its employees. With their help, they could exercise their options - to purchase shares of the company at a fixed cost. In addition to loans, the startup has reduced the period during which company employees cannot exercise options. The program is voluntary and available to Bolt employees in good standing, according to [the](https://www.bolt.com/blog/early-exercise-program) company's official blog. Upon termination of employment at Bolt, the loan received by the employee had to be repaid within 90 days of termination.

[On May 25, it became known](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/25/business/bolt-layoffs.html) to The New York Times that cuts had begun at Bolt. The publication indicated that the company's chat in the corporate Slack messenger was reduced from 900 to 660 users. The startup confirmed the reduction in staff without specifying which departments will suffer the most losses. After the massive layoffs, the company [said](https://www.axios.com/2022/05/26/bolt-financials-loans-come-due) fewer than ten workers were laid off and took out a loan to exercise the option.

“It is no secret that market conditions in our industry and tech sector are changing and we are taking steps to adapt our business to macroeconomic challenges. In order to protect its financial position and achieve profitability with the money available, the company has decided to downsize,” Bolt CEO Maia Curuvilla wrote in a letter to employees.

Large-scale layoffs affected not only Bolt, but fintech as a whole: among the companies that [say goodbye](https://www.fintechfutures.com/2022/05/payments-fintech-bolt-announces-layoffs/) to a significant part of their employees are Klarna (10%), Main Street and BizPay (30%), Robinhood (9%).

Change
------

In announcing the decision to issue loans to employees on his Twitter, Breslow indicated that his proposal is likely to cause a backlash from venture capitalists who are used to a different order of things. However, the scandal involving the entrepreneur occurred for a different reason.

On January 29, Ryan Breslow [tweeted](https://twitter.com/theryanking/status/1487500943511932941?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1487500943511932941%7Ctwgr%5E%7Ctwcon%5Es1_&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2022%2F01%2F31%2Fryanbreslow-bolt%2F) , "\[Accelerator\] YCombinator is not worth joining." In subsequent posts, the startup tried to explain what he means by this: the eminent accelerator has long turned into a closed club, which accepts only acquaintances, and control over the main YCombinator media - the Hacker News forum - even informally belongs to Stripe fintech.

The same company, with the help of its influence on the accelerator, “destroys” any project competing with its products in the bud, which is why the application for admission to the Bolt accelerator was rejected. Breslow also accused Stripe of financing a direct competitor of his company: thanks to [investments](https://techcrunch.com/2021/01/26/fast-raises-102m-as-the-online-checkout-wars-continue-to-attract-huge-investment/) in 2021, Fast startup quickly got to the same valuation as Bolt.

{{< ads >}}

Breslow called his revelations “charitable help to other founders,” but despite the entrepreneur’s benevolent intentions, his posts quickly turned into a meme. “I love reading fan fiction, but decide already: either joining YC is not worth it, or this is the most powerful organization in Silicon Valley,” Sam Altman, former president of YCombinator and CEO of OpenAI , [told Breslow.](https://twitter.com/sama/status/1487520334060597248?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1487520334060597248%7Ctwgr%5E%7Ctwcon%5Es1_&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2022%2F01%2F31%2Fryanbreslow-bolt%2F)

The dissatisfaction of the professional community quickly became a problem for Bolt, and two days after the publication of scandalous posts on Twitter, Breslow [stepped down](https://techcrunch.com/2022/01/31/ryanbreslow-bolt/) as CEO of his own company. Bolt was quick to say the internal change was long overdue and that Breslow, who owns roughly 25% of the $11 billion startup, won't go far and take over as chairman.

The resignation of the founder of the company less than a week after attracting another large-scale investment round discouraged investors. The reason why Breslow decided to distance himself from his own company may be hidden in the problems of Bolt, which became known in May 2022, experts say.

**Authors:** *Pavel Karasev, Nick Lukhminsky*