---
title: "Harder than 1998: what is the media write about a possible default of Russia"
description: Since the end of February, it has become increasingly difficult for Russia to service its debt. The reason for the default for the first time may not be a lack of funds, but a geopolitical confrontation. Here are the forecasts on this subject given by Bloomberg, Financial Times and other foreign media.
date: 2022-06-06T10:00:43+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-06T10:00:43+08:00
images:
- FrVTFE2.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Martin Pechy / Unsplash'
authors:
- r-insight
interest: investments
channel: 
- economics
tags: 
---

Russia's possible default on sovereign Eurobonds has been discussed since the beginning of the military special operation, when the assets of the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance were frozen under sanctions. However, on March 2, the US Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) issued a general license allowing transactions required to receive payments on Russian securities through May 25. Moreover, in practice, the US authorities allowed payments from frozen reserves. Therefore, at first the main intrigue was whether the OFAC license would be extended.

However, already on April 4, the US Treasury announced that it would no longer allow payments from frozen assets, and blocked the payment of the accumulated coupon, as well as the principal amount of the Russia-2022 bonds. Thus, the Russian authorities were faced with a choice: to make payments from foreign exchange reserves within the country (or from new receipts) or, on the other hand, to admit default. The Ministry of Finance took the first path, according to [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) , using the Dom.RF bank, which was not subject to sanctions, for this. Nevertheless, tensions around the Russian debt continued to grow. At a May 18 press conference, US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen expressed doubt that OFAC would renew the license. This really did not happen: its action expired on Wednesday, May 25, at 00:01 (07:01 Moscow time). And how journalists write[Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/) , this appears to be the first time that a major emerging economy has defaulted for geopolitical reasons, not because it has nothing to pay back.

{{< ads >}}

According to [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/)Despite all the difficulties, since February 22, Russia has managed to make payments on seven bonded loans. In anticipation of the cancellation of the OFAC license, the Russian Ministry of Finance allocated funds a week ahead (May 20) to pay coupon income on Eurobonds maturing in 2026 in the amount of $71.25 million and maturing in 2036 in the amount of €26.5 million. date of payment, May 27, these funds (about $100 million), received by the paying agent NCO National Settlement Depository JSC (NSD), have not been received by bondholders. Correspondent banks were unable to bring the funds due to the cancellation of the OFAC license. Since that date, Russia has entered a 30-day grace period, after which the country may face default. If somehow the problem is resolved,

The important point is that the funds for the 2026 and 2036 Eurobonds have been received by the paying agent, which allows Russia to protest a possible default. In addition, according to [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/) , analysts at JPMorgan (which acts as a correspondent bank for the Ministry of Finance) consider NSD's performance as a paying agent a sufficient condition for the CDS payment mechanism (a tool that allows its buyer to insure against default on third party obligations in exchange for for regular payments - _R-Insight_ ).

In contrast to the situation with the April payments, there is virtually no room for maneuver for the financial authorities. The main decision in the Ministry of Finance considers a mechanism similar to that used in gas payments. Investors will receive payments in rubles, and then give instructions to buy foreign currency in one of the Russian banks. It is noteworthy that earlier an attempt to pay off part of the debt in rubles on Eurobonds "Russia-2022" and "Russia-2042" was unequivocally regarded by rating agencies as a default. In particular, Moody's position was that “bond contracts do not provide for redemption in any other currency than the dollar. Although Eurobonds issued after 2018 are eligible for payments in rubles under certain conditions, contracts for Eurobonds issued before 2018 (including 2022 and 2042 bonds)

Aricapital portfolio manager Alexei Tretyakov told [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) : “I don't think this will work. It will be too difficult for foreign investors to open accounts in Russian banks. This may suit large institutional players. But for them, working with Russian contractors will most likely result in reputational losses and violation of the sanctions regime.” Gabriel Foa of Algebris Global Credit Opportunity Fund also points out that it's not just a matter of technical difficulties: “Now these papers are highly undesirable. Clients are asking portfolio managers not to invest in Russia and close their positions.”

The situation with the Russian debt is further complicated by the fact that the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) recorded a “non-payment” event on the same bonds maturing on April 4, part of the payments on which were planned to be made in rubles. Due to the deferred payment in dollars, investors received less interest of $1.9 million, which was accrued until the date of actual repayment. And now, according to the Financial Times, it could trigger $2.5 billion in CDS payments. "It looks like a default, at least in CDS terms," ​​Marcello Assalin, head of emerging markets debt at William Blair, tells the FT. Whether there will be a default in a broader sense is still unclear. This will be shown in the coming payments. The FT notes that in the event of a default, holders of Russian debt, the total amount of which is $ 38 billion,

[Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) columnist Marcus Ashworth wrote back in April that "Russia's default is only a matter of time." In a rather emotional text, he referred to Bluebay Asset Management’s emerging markets strategist Tim Ash, who noted that the consequences of the default for Russia would be “lack of access to international capital markets, very high borrowing costs even from China, lack of investment, economic growth and falling life." In conclusion, Ashworth said that this crisis will be worse than 1998 precisely because of Russia's isolation from international capital markets. The inevitable increase in the cost of borrowing was noted by many experts polled by [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/). In particular, Flavio Carpenzano of Capital Group noted that a default “always raises the cost of borrowing, which is likely to happen in Russia. They will have to pay more."

{{< ads >}}

On the other hand, there is also an opinion that the default itself, if it takes place, will not have such a strong impact on the Russian economy. Janet Yellen at a press conference on May 18 actually said exactly this: “If Russia does not find a legal way to make payments and finds itself in a state of technical default on its debt, then I do not think that this will significantly change the situation in the country. It is already cut off from capital markets and will continue to be so.”

The Russian economy is already being affected by a number of factors, perhaps no less serious in their consequences than the debt situation. “From the very beginning,” says [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) Russia economist Scott Johnson, “we identified four main causes of a possible financial crisis – bank failures, a sharp weakening of the ruble, a decrease in lending and debt defaults. The government is very successful in dealing with the first two problems, however, at the risk of losing control over the latter. It is quite possible, however, that Russia would fully justify the status of a reliable borrower if it were not for the restrictions imposed on it.

_Sources: [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) , [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/) , Financial Times_