---
title: "How a business uses the tactics of “Sberbank security services” for sales"
description: "To convince a customer to make a purchase or increase the average check, companies resort to social engineering methods: they play on the fear of lost profits, offer gifts for purchases above a certain amount, and use fake reviews to convince them"
date: 2022-06-07T09:04:37+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-07T09:04:37+08:00
images:
- 7KHRx1F.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Bojan Milinkov / Shutterstock'
authors:
- Alisa Kurmanaeva
interest: marketing and advertising
channel: 
- world business trends
tags: 
---

Social engineering is the psychological manipulation of people to perform certain actions. Her methods have become widely known thanks to bank scammers trying to get confidential information about the victim's account. Criminals call a person under the guise of a "security service of Sberbank" or other banks, inform him of a suspicious debit from his account, and then find out his card number and one-time password. However, social engineering techniques are also widespread in trade: sellers, of course, do not steal funds from cards, but manipulate the mind of the buyer so that he makes a purchase faster or purchases a product that he does not really need. What emotions do companies play on and where is the line beyond which their actions will already violate the law?

Sneakers at gunpoint
--------------------

One of the most common methods of influencing a potential buyer is social proof. This term was introduced in 1984 by the American psychologist Robert Cialdini in his book The Psychology of Influence. We are talking about situations where people make decisions based on the actions of others. For example, a person makes a purchase because he was recommended this product by friends, relatives or someone authoritative for him. Social approval is easy to imitate. For example, the energy drink manufacturer Red Bull in the late 1980s and early 1990s not only gave away its products to famous DJs, but also [left](https://www.ukessays.com/essays/marketing/european-business-studies-red-bull-case-study-marketing-essay.php) empty drink cans next to the urns of the most frequented nightclubs. Thus, the company tried to show potential consumers that the drink is popular. Out-of-the-box promotion methods have paid off: in 2020, Red Bull [dominated](https://www.statista.com/statistics/306864/market-share-of-leading-energy-drink-brands-in-the-us-based-on-case-volume-sales/#:~:text=Red%20Bull%20captured%20almost%20a,billion%20U.S.%20dollars%20in%20sales.) the U.S. energy drink market with a 25% share, and its sales amounted to more than $2.89 billion.

Other types of social proof include ratings, counters of views and purchases of goods on the site, user reviews of goods. The latter are an important factor in choosing: according to [a study by the](https://www.oberlo.com/blog/online-review-statistics#:~:text=Nearly%20nine%20out%20of%20ten%20consumers%20read%20reviews%20before%20making,as%20much%20as%20personal%20recommendations) Danish review service Trustpilot, 89% of users read reviews before purchasing a product, and according to a study by the British company that develops the BrightLocal SEO platform, 79% of buyers trust reviews as much as personal recommendations. A study by Northwestern University (a private research university in Chicago) [found](https://spiegel.medill.northwestern.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2021/04/Spiegel_Online-Review_eBook_Jun2017_FINAL.pdf) that a product with five reviews increases the likelihood of a purchase by 270% compared to a product with no reviews. Reviews and ratings are widely used in e-commerce, including by e-commerce giants like Amazon and eBay.

{{< ads >}}

The problem is that it is not uncommon for sellers to post fake product reviews using entire review companies. Often this leads to blocking sellers and lawsuits. For example, in September 2021, Amazon permanently [suspended](https://www.theverge.com/2021/9/17/22680269/amazon-ban-chinese-brands-review-abuse-fraud-policy) 600 Chinese brands from 3,000 seller accounts for review fraud, where brands allegedly asked users to write a review in exchange for a gift certificate. And in February 2022, he [filed](https://www.forbes.com/sites/joewalsh/2022/02/22/amazon-sues-two-companies-for-allegedly-selling-fake-product-reviews/#:~:text=In%20a%20statement%20announcing%20the,to%20write%20glowing%20Amazon%20reviews.) sued AppSally and Rebatest, calling them "the biggest fake review brokers" and claiming that they are part of a larger industry of posting "bright" reviews from users in exchange for monetary rewards or gifts. According to Amazon, AppSally sold fake reviews to its customers for $20, and Rebatest asked reviewers to purchase products from the marketplace and then reimbursed them via PayPal for leaving positive reviews.

The New York Times article ["How E-Commerce Sites Manipulate You into Buying Something You Might Not Want"](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/24/technology/e-commerce-dark-patterns-psychology.html) another example: on the site of the Thredup.com online store, notifications pop up about how much money other users of the site have saved. "Alexandra from Anaheim just saved $222 on her order," the message says alongside a photo of the dress. But Alexandra from Anaheim did not buy the dress: it simply does not exist, the author of the article argues. Instead, the code pulled combinations from a programmed list of names, locations, and products and passed them off as real recent purchases. The author explained that the statement was made on the basis of research conducted by the staff of Princeton University. They developed software that automatically scanned more than 10,000 sites and found that more than 1,200 of them were using "bad tactics", such as fake notifications on ThredUp. The researchers drew attention

The New York Times repeated the experiment. One day, the use of the code led to reports that "Abigail of Albuquerque" had purchased over 20 items, including dresses in multiple sizes. In other cases, he gave out messages with a difference of several days or months that different people were buying the same product. At the request of the publication, a spokeswoman for ThredUp said that the company used real data, and included fake names and locations "for confidentiality." When asked whether these purchases were actually made, the company did not answer.

{{< ads >}}

Sometimes companies, on the contrary, play on social disapproval of some actions. The “peacock tail effect” plays a role here: the company seems to be telling consumers: “We are so cool that we can even afford this.” For example, in 1984, Nike created a special model of Air Jordan sneakers for basketball player Michael Jordan and involved him in promotions. When Jordan wore the shoes to a game, the National Basketball League fined him $5,000 because the shoes were red and black and players were only allowed to wear white-dominated shoes. Nike paid the fine and played up the situation in their commercial: “October 15, Nike has created a revolutionary new basketball shoe. On October 18, the NBA kicked her out of the game. Luckily, the NBA can't stop you from wearing them." During the first 12 months of sales, the company[earned](https://www.forbes.com/sites/kurtbadenhausen/2020/05/03/michael-jordans-1-billion-nike-endorsement-is-the-biggest-bargain-in-sports/?sh=7339c31d6136) over $ 100 million on these sneakers. Over time, Air Jordan models became so popular that sometimes sneaker owners were literally [robbed.](https://www.wowt.com/2021/04/13/sheriff-13-year-old-robbed-at-gunpoint-of-air-jordan-shoes/) For example, in 2021 in Nebraska, two men took this model from a 13-year-old girl, threatening her with a gun. Nike accounted for 86% of the U.S. basketball shoe market and 96% of the basketball-style shoe market in 2019 , according [to research firm NPD.](file:///D:/Users/Alice/Downloads/Nike%E2%80%99s%20share%20of%20the%20performance%20basketball%20market,%20including%20the%20Jordan%20Brand,%20was%2086%25%20last%20year,%20according%20to%20market%20research%20firm%20NPD)

With the announcement in 2020 of the regime of self-isolation in Russia and many other countries, cold calls have experienced a real renaissance. It has been repeatedly [noted](https://www.sostav.ru/publication/7-prichin-pochemu-kholodnye-zvonki-dolzhny-umeret-28722.html) that they are not very effective and mostly annoy subscribers. However, the point, perhaps, is not in the changed psychology of the consumer, but in the fact that the scripts that the operators are talking about make little use of social engineering. After his release from prison, the famous hacker Kevin Mitnick wrote the book The Art of Deception, which in the 2000s became the desktop for many CEOs. It [describes](https://salesgravy.com/socially-engineering-your-prospecting-calls/) a number of techniques that Mitnick himself used in telephone conversations so that the interlocutor would behave in the way he needed. For example, Mitnick advises to immediately introduce yourself and name the company (surprisingly, the real operators of many Russian firms for some reason do not do this): this creates the illusion of a sincere conversation; do not offer a product, but ask for help (most people are determined to help - this way you can ask them which services are most interesting to them, and offer the right one, not random); use justifying statements like “I want to be sure I’m talking to the right person” (no one wants to be unnecessary and incompetent); not to pronounce monologues, but to ask questions, etc.

No time to wait
---------------

Many companies push consumers to buy using fear of missing out, or FOMO. “Anything that plays on this fear — ticking clock emoji in a marketing email, limited-time offers — can ignite a sense of urgency and an impulse to buy,” [said](https://www.social-engineer.org/social-engineering/influence-tactics-in-marketing-and-sales/) American psychologist Robert Cialdini. According [to](https://www.business2community.com/strategy/8-stats-urgency-scarcity-thatll-surprise-01827556) an Experian report, advertisements or emails with urgency notifications had at least 14% higher click-through rates and twice the transaction rates compared to regular ads or emails. This technique also includes notifications of a shortage of goods or limited supply. Many companies and services play on the fear of lost profits. For example, on the site of the online travel service Expedia, notifications regularly appear in the cards of accommodation facilities that the hotel has a limited number of rooms left. After browsing a specific Airbnb listing, it's not uncommon for the platform to display a notification that the listing is expected to be in high demand on the user's planned stay dates.

The “Fantastic Sale” promotion, regularly organized by the Brazilian chain of stores Magazine Luiza, also plays on the fear of missing out on a profitable opportunity: for three days, customers can purchase goods in physical points and online with a discount of up to 80%. During the first such campaign in 1993, the company managed to sell goods for $450 thousand in five hours. And, for example, on January 3, 2004, on one of the days of the campaign, more than 2 million customers [made](https://slotemail.com/mdtraining/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Magazine-Luiza-Building-a-Retail-Model-of-Courting-the-Poor-9-606-0482.pdf) purchases in Magazine Luiza: the daily revenue of the network was that day exceeded the standard daily revenue by 840%. In 2019, the volume of sales during the promotion was [equal](https://www.riotimesonline.com/brazil-news/miscellaneous/magazine-luiza-holding-fantastic-sale-on-friday-with-up-to-70-percent-discounts/) to the volume of sales for 15 regular days.

Famous sales promotions like Singles Day in China or Black Friday are built on the same principle: the buyer is offered goods at a discount for a short period of time. Often sellers are cunning: in 2021, the consumer group Which? conducted its own [investigation](https://news.sky.com/story/black-friday-nine-out-of-10-deals-are-the-same-price-or-cheaper-earlier-in-the-year-investigation-says-12476103) and found that during Black Friday the previous year, 184 of the 201 products they selected for investigation in the six months prior to this promotion were sold at the same price or cheaper. 197 items were sold at the same price or cheaper after the promotion. Nevertheless, the techniques achieve the desired effect: in 2020, online sales during Black Friday in the United States [amounted to](https://financesonline.com/black-friday-statistics/#:~:text=Black%20Friday%20Sales%20Statistics,-Black%20Friday%202020&text=Cyber%20Monday%202020%20garnered%20%2410.8,YoY%20to%20around%20%249%20billion.)a record $9 billion, up 22% from 2019. Total sales, including physical stores, were $188.2 billion, nearly $46 billion more than a year earlier. In 2021, Alibaba's Singles' Day [sales](https://www.forbes.ru/biznes/445775-prodazi-alibaba-v-den-holostaka-ustanovili-rekord) were a record $84.5 billion, up from $77.8 billion in 2019.

{{< ads >}}

LLC "Free Cheese"
-----------------

Some online retailers encourage people to make additional purchases with free shipping. According [to](https://www.statista.com/statistics/482963/free-shipping-measures-of-us-shoppers/) Statista, 48% of customers are willing to add an additional item to their cart in order to qualify for such a service. This is how, in particular, the British online retailer Asos operates: when purchasing goods for [a certain](https://www.asos.com/customer-care/delivery/how-does-your-uk-standard-delivery-service-work/) amount, the client may not pay for delivery. The fact that the service can increase sales is evidenced by the [example](https://www.printful.com/blog/how-to-use-free-shipping-to-increase-your-average-order-value/) of Printful, a print and dropshipping service: from June 2016 to July 2017, it introduced free shipping within the United States in one of its online stores, pre-increasing the cost of goods by $5. During this period, the number of orders increased by 10% per month, and the average check by 5%, which increased the monthly income of the store by $250.

In fact, as retail analysts have repeatedly [analyzed](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/01/the-myth-of-free-shipping/603031/) , delivery is almost never free: in order to receive it, the buyer most often has to “round up” the amount of his purchases to a certain figure, and the excess goods he purchased usually more than cover the company’s delivery costs. However, free shipping relieves the consumer of the so-called "pain of loss" - he does not feel as if he paid for some separate service. Calling physical stores to pay with a card serves the same purpose - on average, people manage paper money much more sensibly, because they do not like to give something tangible to another.

Some companies lure the user with gifts: after receiving something as a gift, a potential customer may feel compelled to take the step back and buy the product. Distributors of Israeli cosmetics DeSheli actively [used](https://vc.ru/marketing/45888-intelligentnye-kristally-sahara-i-kredity-na-desyatki-tysyach-rubley-istoriya-prodavcov-pereocenennoy-kosmetiki-desheli) this method : potential clients were called with an offer of a free cosmetic procedure, and already on the spot they offered to buy a set of funds worth 40-60 thousand rubles. At the same time, the owners of spa salons bought cases with cosmetics at a price of 8.5–9 thousand rubles, and taking into account the costs of the office and staff, the cost of the sets was 19.2 thousand rubles.

Other distributors went for more sophisticated moves, because of which they eventually became defendants in criminal cases. [For example](https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3365306), one of these cases was initiated by the investigative department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Nizhny Novgorod Region: during the investigation, it turned out that in one of the salons that sold cosmetics, after a free procedure, clients were informed about the poor condition of their skin and hair, and then they were presented with a gift set of cosmetics and asked to sign in receiving it. The clients were sure that the contracts did not bear any financial obligations, and they signed the papers. According to investigators, with the help of these agreements, loans for large sums were issued. As a result, the suspects were able to fraudulently receive more than 10 million rubles. almost 200 women. Social engineering methods are effective, but they also work in the opposite direction: those who use them may have an irresistible desire to degrade into ordinary fraud and commit a criminal offense.

**Author:** *Alisa Kurmanaeva*