---
title: "How startups make billions of dollars treating impotence online"
description: 'Men’s health app companies are turning into unicorns, raising hundreds of millions of dollars, because they solve not only a medical problem, but also an ethical one. The one who removes the taboo from the word “impotence” will conquer the world'
date: 2022-06-12T17:24:51+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T17:24:51+08:00
images:
- yXI5jhp.jpg
caption: 'Photo: 57stock / imagebroker.com / Global Look Press'
authors:
- Daria Salnikova
interest: Investments
channel: 
- venture industry and startups
tags: 
---

In the world of startups, a new concept has appeared - "menteh" - the so-called Internet services that help men overcome erectile dysfunction. The potential market for such companies is, unfortunately, vast. According to WHO, more than 160 million men worldwide [suffer](https://www.gdp3podolsk.ru/blog/narushenie-jerekcii-ili-jerektilnaja-disfunkcija) from erectile dysfunction. Already at the age of 40-60, they manifest themselves to a greater or lesser extent in half of the men, and in the 60+ group - even in 70%. Due to COVID-19, those who are dissatisfied with their male power are likely to [become](https://www.sechenov.ru/pressroom/news/sily-telesnye-covid-19-na-tri-mesyatsa-ukhudshaet-potentsiyu-u-muzhchin/#:~:text=%D0%A1%D0%BE%D0%B3%D0%BB%D0%B0%D1%81%D0%BD%D0%BE%20%D0%BF%D0%BE%D1%81%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%B4%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%BC%20%D0%BD%D0%B0%D1%83%D1%87%D0%BD%D1%8B%D0%BC%20%D0%B8%D1%81%D1%81%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%B4%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%8F%D0%BC%2C%20SARS,%D1%81%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B6%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5%20%D1%83%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%BD%D1%8F%20%D1%82%D0%B5%D1%81%D1%82%D0%BE%D1%81%D1%82%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%BD%D0%B0%20%D0%B2%20%D0%BA%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B8.) more: coronavirus leads to problems with blood vessels that are dangerous for potency.

A separate difficulty is that men are embarrassed to talk about their problems: according [to](https://www.nursingtimes.net/clinical-archive/continence/13-8-million-have-delayed-visiting-their-gp-out-of-embarrassment-10-09-2021/) the medical company Essity, 13.8 million Britons last year postponed a visit to the doctor because they were very embarrassed to talk about their illness, and every 10th pulls with this two times. of the year. That is why companies that relieve the client of the need to personally talk with a doctor about embarrassing health ussues, that is, about “diseases that are embarrassing to talk about,” are actively attracting investor money. Over the past two years, startups that promise to save a man from potency problems without going to the doctor have received up to $100-200 million from investors. Many of the founders know about erectile dysfunction firsthand: having encountered it in their youth, they decided to help themselves and others men.

Started with a personal problem
-------------------------------

Startup founders who challenge impotence often start with a personal problem. One of the co-founders of the American company Roman, Zachariah Reitano, himself suffered from erectile dysfunction. In his case, it turned out to be a symptom of heart disease. The treatment Reitano received helped keep his heart in order, but the impotence still persisted, this time as a side effect of the heart pills. At the age of 26, this is quite sad, and Reitano decided to help fellow sufferers without forcing them to overcome the awkwardness in the doctor's office. [Founded](https://www.metro.us/this-nyc-startup-is-fighting-the-stigma-of-erectile-dysfunction/) in 2017, Roman began with online consultations that allowed patients to avoid having to tell a live specialist about their problem. Users for $15 downloaded a medical history and answered questions from a doctor, who wrote a prescription for Viagra or another similar remedy if he did not find contraindications and did not suspect a more serious illness. The medicine was delivered to the house in an "impersonal" package so that the spouse and other relatives could not guess what it was.

{{<ads>}}

Since then, the company, now called Ro, has significantly expanded its range of services to solve men's problems. Ro bought the startup Modern Fertility and began offering services to combat excess weight, smoking, and even infertility. Acquired the Workpath platform, which allows physicians to direct nurses for testing, and Kit, a resource for delivering medicines and treatments at home, opened the Ro Mind digital mental health clinic and Ro Pharmacy, an online cash-based pharmacy. During the pandemic, the company worked with the New York State Department of Health to provide home-based vaccinations for older Americans. In March 2021, Ro was valued at $5 billion, and after a recent [round](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-02-15/ro-funding-round-brings-health-startup-s-valuation-to-7-billion)funding in February 2022 began to cost $7 billion. Investors ShawSpring Partners, General Catalyst, FirstMark Capital and TQ Ventures allocated $150 million to launch Ro Derm, an online dermatology service.

Another major digital health spokesperson has also used impotence treatment as a springboard to greater telemedicine. American Hims & Hers, which began with the field of male sexual health, today also treats not only men, but also women. In addition to sexual, the company deals with skin and hair problems, such as baldness and acne. Hims & Hers sells medicines and personal care products and provides online medical consultations. In January 2021, the company went public with an IPO: its value in the first days of trading was $1.6 billion.

{{<ads>}}

No stigma
---------

Followers of Ro and Hims tend to take one of two paths—either connecting the doctor to the patient in a less embarrassing online environment, or educating the client and providing a program for self-administration. New York-based startup Vault, which offers supervised home health care to victims of hormonal imbalances and erectile dysfunction, [has raised](https://techcrunch.com/2020/03/12/mens-at-home-health-startup-vault-takes-in-30-million-from-tiger-global/) $30 million in 2020 from Tiger Global Management, Redesign Health and Declaration Capital. Today, services are available in New York, Nashville, Dallas and several Florida cities, with plans for 42 more locations.

Vault CEO and founder Jason Feldman wants to invest in more practitioners and more awareness of the issue. “We are eliminating the indignity of having to explain symptoms to a doctor who is not specifically trained as a men's health expert,” Feldman explains. Supplements don't solve the problem and have unpleasant side effects, Vault executives say, so they went the other way: they could make an appointment for an at-home examination and blood test taken by a professional nurse, and then discuss the results with a doctor online. Based on the results, the doctor will make appointments and send prescriptions. The patient may receive testosterone injections, topical gels, creams and tablets, as well as procedures aimed at improving physical fitness. The company monitors the progress of treatment and consults periodically. You can buy a subscription to a monthly service at home, its cost starts at $199. In addition to sexual issues, the Vault app helps manage weight gain, fatigue, and cognitive decline.

{{<ads>}}

California [startup](https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/startup-looks-help-folks-curb-sexual-dysfunction-app) Lover also recently raised a hefty $2 million to develop a sexual health app. Lover's recipe is to record a series of audio and video materials, each focused on a specific issue, and provide users with a tool to assess their level of sex life. Based on the results, the platform generates an individual plan for solving the problem and provides access to relevant materials. Lover founder Jan Bagniewski believes that his brainchild "builds bridges between supply and demand and makes solving the problem less embarrassing and much less expensive than therapy with a sex therapist, of which, moreover, there are only about a thousand in the United States" (unlike Russia, where almost anyone can be called a sex therapist, in America you need to get a special license for this). Since cognitive therapy has no side effects, in contrast, for example, Viagra or other drugs, the company was recently accepted into the Food and Drug Administration's Safe Technology Program (STeP). Since its launch, the company has expanded its range: now the application has a forum where the doctor answers popular questions, and the opportunity to get a half-hour online consultation with a sex therapist. $2 million provided by investment companies Lerer Hippeau, Manta Ray, Global Founders Capital, FJ Labs will be used to further develop and launch the application on Android. and the opportunity to get a half-hour consultation of a sex therapist online. $2 million provided by investment companies Lerer Hippeau, Manta Ray, Global Founders Capital, FJ Labs will be used to further develop and launch the application on Android. and the opportunity to get a half-hour consultation of a sex therapist online. $2 million provided by investment companies Lerer Hippeau, Manta Ray, Global Founders Capital, FJ Labs will be used to further develop and launch the application on Android.

The power of meditation
-----------------------

European startups are a little behind the American ones, but their menteh pioneers are actively [attracting](https://sifted.eu/articles/embarrassing-health-issues-startups/) investments here as well. [Founded](https://siliconcanals.com/crowdfunding/regimen-raises-1-9m/) in 2019, Regimen, a startup with offices in Berlin and San Jose, raised $2.25 million in a seed round in September 2021. The round was led by the Swiss company Ringier Digital Ventures. Regimen's co-founder and managing director Max Kersting struggled with erectile dysfunction for a long time and, after failing again, enlisted several doctors to develop his own program.

{{<ads>}}

Kersting and two other co-founders, Wolf Becken and Wilko Kunert, adhere to the principles of holistic medicine, which treats the whole body, not a problem. The application selects for each user daily exercises for the pelvic floor muscles, cardio training, nutrition program, mindfulness training, educational materials, and conducts regular evaluation of effectiveness. The subscription costs the user $95 per month. According to feedback from several thousand people, with regular use of the recommendations of Regimen, there is a five-point improvement in the International Index of Erectile Function. The scale marks different degrees of erectile dysfunction from 26–30 points (no problems) to 6–10 (severe dysfunction).

Wellster, a startup headquartered in Munich, received €35 ​​million in spring 2020 and another $20 million in early 2021 from London-based Claret Capital. Wellster helps restore male sexual health, stop hair loss and skin diseases (under the Spring brand), supports mental health (under the Easy brand), and wants to launch a femtech platform by the end of the year. London Numan treats not only erectile dysfunction, but also premature ejaculation, as well as hair loss. According to its own data, the company has already helped 250,000 Britons. The startup is also starting to expand its range and plans to launch blood tests first. Numan raised £30m in September 2021.

Founded in 2010, Numan's fellow British-based Zava focused on the sexual and reproductive health of men and women and today addresses a wide range of issues from chronic pain to hair loss in men or facial hair removal in women. He communicates with patients mainly through online forms and, more recently, video consultations, and delivers medicines to patients in unnamed packaging. Moreover, Zava services do not appear on bank statements. In June 2019, the startup raised $32 million, and in 2021 it acquired medical technology company Medlanes and video platform Sprechstunde.online. British-based Manual, which received $30 million in March 2021 from London-based Felix Capital and Berlin-based Cherry Ventures, offers men treatment for hair loss, erectile dysfunction and blood tests.

Founded in 2019 in London, Mojo bills itself as a "virtual trainer" that aims to "encourage men to get their erections back and have sex without the need for medication." The user gets access to video tutorials and exercises, therapeutic podcasts and meditation courses, as well as to the thematic community of fellow sufferers, communication in which is designed to reduce the stigma of the problem. In September 2021, Mojo raised $3.6 million from London-based Octopus Ventures, which previously backed femtech service Elvie, and several established angel investors. At this time, the company already had 50,000 users in 36 countries.

Since the beginning of the pandemic, projects with women as clients have received record volumes of venture investments. This led to the emergence of femtech — the development of applications and gadgets related to women's health, from cycle control to a pregnancy tracker and breastfeeding guide. The term was coined by Danish businesswoman Ida Tin, the head of the company that developed the menstrual cycle calendar and the accompanying symptoms of Clue. The application, created in 2013, attracted $7 million two years later, and by 2019 — [already](https://www.forbes.com/sites/bryancollinseurope/2019/07/04/ida-tin-is-leading-the-charge-in-femtech-a-50b-industry/?sh=a3eabb55f9ff) $30 million. In 2020, the femtech market, according [to](https://www.gminsights.com/industry-analysis/femtech-market) Global Market Insights, was estimated at $22.5 billion, although “female” projects account for only 1.4% of global investment in healthcare, which gave Research and Markets experts reason [to admit](https://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/5094119/global-female-technology-femtech-market?utm_source=CI&utm_medium=PressRelease&utm_code=krd5cg&utm_campaign=1438547+-+Global+%243%2B+Billion+Female+Technology+(Femtech)+Market+Analysis+and+Forecast%2C+2019-2020+%26+2030&utm_exec=chdo54prd) the industry is heavily underfunded. Femtech is considered a "blue ocean" that is predicted to grow rapidly. It also has Russian projects: the Amma pregnancy tracker application raised $4 million in 2021. According [to](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/pregnancy-tracker) Crunchbase, the active monthly audience of Amma pregnancy tracker exceeds 1.5 million people worldwide.

{{<ads>}}

Curds against dysfunction
-------------------------

It cannot be said that Russian entrepreneurs do not try to work with the problem of erectile dysfunction. In particular, Boris Aleksandrov, the former head of Rostagroexport and the founder of the B.Yu. Aleksandrov brand, was closely involved in it. The entrepreneur was treated for cancer of the lymph nodes and more than once observed how cancer patients overtook the side effects of "chemistry" and procedures. “I decided to tackle this issue so as not to worsen the quality of life,” the dairy magnate explained in his autobiography, Cheese. The specialists, whom the entrepreneur financed with his own funds, focused on two areas. On the basis of the Moscow [clinic](http://raemed.ru/page21649140.html)at Ivankovskoye Shosse, they developed a non-surgical method for returning an erection, conducted a clinical study and found that in 84% of cases, patients with weak erections can be helped by training the muscles of the perineum on a special chair alone. The technique was used in the Center for Weight Loss opened by Alexandrov in the Latvian town of Aizpute.

The second area of ​​research is electrical stimulation. In 2017, at the Adler nursery at the Research Institute of Medical Primatology, a group of scientists conducted experiments with monkeys. They also attracted foreign experts, for example, Californian professor Tom Liu. The researchers learned how to [induce](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TsaBI1vBfEk) an erection in primates by electrical stimulation with small currents, and, having received permission from the ethical commission, together with the Research Institute of Urology of the Russian Ministry of Health, they tested the technology on people who underwent prostate removal in Moscow and Krasnodar. “The scientific results achieved by the fall of 2019 in humans are encouraging,” Alexandrov wrote. It was not possible to find out how things are today with the research begun by the multimillionaire: the Moscow clinic, judging by the site, is now under reconstruction.

{{<ads>}}

However, domestic digital health is not in a hurry to enter the "blue ocean". Google Play found "Urologist online" and "Folk recipes" in the "Medicine", "Potency for all ages" and "Home improvement of potency" in the "Books and references" section, as well as "Erectile dysfunction test", For some reason, it fell into the "Entertainment" category. “I haven’t seen anything like this inside Russia on our radars,” says Dmitry Kalaev, director of the IIDF accelerator. \- The last two years since the beginning of COVID-19, there has been an unprecedented surge in Mental Health startups (meditation courses by Mo and others, Welltory health control, Zigmund psychiatry), new players such as BestDoctor and SberStrakhovanie went to share the health insurance market, selling telemedicine under the hood from the ecosystem. Well, now, even with import substitution, the focus is shifting to various solutions, which were supplied by companies that no longer work in Russia. These are both different medical “pieces of iron” and information systems for them.”

There are no special solutions for the treatment of erectile dysfunction and men's health, the director of IIDF admits: “It seems to me that this is a problem of mentality: brutal Russian men do not go to doctors until they themselves disappear.” Meanwhile, according to some reports, a good half of Russians have an “embarrassing problem”. If someone from medical technology manages to get through to them, this, perhaps, can become one of the brightest take-offs in Russian IT.

**Author:** *Daria Salnikova*