---
title: "Postponement? Not today: working with receivables in a crisis"
description: A crisis is a bad time for payment deferrals. Today it is scary to lose a partner or a client, but debts without control can lead to the loss of the entire company. About what alarm signals cannot be ignored at different stages of cooperation - EOS experts
date: 2022-06-11T13:59:21+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T13:59:21+08:00
images:
- amdstdX.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- eos
interest: finance
channel: 
- financial strategy
tags: 
---

Accounts receivable are property claims of the company to legal entities and individuals. For example, these include unpaid invoices for already delivered goods or services, overpaid taxes, etc., which are components of the company's current assets.

During a crisis, control over receivables, as well as its optimization, are the most important measures to maintain the financial stability of a business. To do this, it is necessary to correctly assess the risks of working with counterparties, clearly negotiate the deadlines for fulfilling obligations and monitor their observance.

Preventive measures
-------------------

If you start working with accounts receivable already at the stage of concluding an agreement, this will minimize the risks of its occurrence and growth.

**Before the conclusion of the contract**

Before concluding an agreement, it is necessary to check the reliability of the counterparty. To do this, we recommend using the following simple algorithm.

1.  Checking the counterparty by TIN. You can do this on the Rusprofile website or any other specialized service. You can find out if the company is in the process of liquidation, as well as background information: who is the head of the company, its details, OKVED codes, etc.
2.  Obtaining an extract from the Unified State Register of Legal Entities / EGRIP. It can also be obtained from specialized services (for example, on the website of the Federal Tax Service nalog.ru). A more thorough analysis of the statement will allow you to determine whether a potential counterparty is a one-day firm. So, if the legal address in the Unified State Register of Legal Entities differs from the actual one, the company is obliged to create a separate subdivision at the actual location, which in turn implies separate jobs for employees.
3.  Checking the solvency of the counterparty. It is necessary to understand in advance whether the company has signs of insolvency, for example, outstanding writ of execution. You can check the company using the Fedresurs website, as well as My Arbiter. These sites provide information on bankruptcy cases.
4.  Business reputation analysis. Here it is necessary to check whether the counterparty has recently acted as a defendant for the recovery of funds. You can find this out with the help of a file of arbitration cases.
5.  Checking the business relationship of a potential counterparty. This step is necessary in cases where you have discovered that he is a party to litigation. You can check it, based on the data of court cases that are in the public domain.

{{<ads>}}

Before concluding an agreement, ask the counterparty for copies of the statutory documents, the decision and order on the appointment of the director, as well as pages of the director's passport. This will help to avoid situations where the contract is concluded by an unauthorized person, which makes the transaction invalid.

We also recommend that you connect the financial department of your company, entrusting it with calculations of the reliability of a potential counterparty based on a copy of its accounting documents.

**Immediately after the conclusion of the contract**

When the contract is signed, the products are shipped or the services are rendered, the period of the stipulated receivables begins. At this time, it is not overdue, since the established deadlines for the fulfillment of obligations by the counterparty have not yet come. However, the actions to work with receivables should be performed already at this stage. Why is it necessary.

1.  Properly complete paperwork. You will be able to file a claim for overdue receivables only if you have the proper accounting documents for the transaction.
2.  Obtain written confirmation from the counterparty that he is satisfied with the delivered goods or services rendered. He must sign an act or an invoice, because this is what often becomes the subject of manipulation: the counterparty may refer to poor-quality work, explaining the delay in payments.
3.  Keep the deal under control. The managers of your company must control all the transactions that are carried out. So, if the due date for payment of receivables is approaching, the manager should call and remind the counterparty of this. This item is extremely important when working with partners, the risk of interaction with which is quite high.

In a crisis period, attention to documentation and control over the fulfillment of obligations should be especially close. But it is not worth putting pressure on counterparties. It is better to discuss the terms in advance and set control points.

If you wish, you can introduce the practice of gratitude to those customers who pay receivables on time. For example, a manager might send them a thank you note. Also, at the end of each year, you can present small gifts to such counterparties or provide additional discounts to the most conscientious customers and partners.

{{<ads>}}

**When the contract has already been signed**

If an agreement with a counterparty has been concluded and has been in effect for a long time, monitoring is still necessary. The most trustworthy and trusted partners can also experience difficulties or even go bankrupt.

You can track this using the SPARK-Interfax or Globas information systems. They have a built-in monitoring function that allows you to quickly identify data updates on the company's counterparties. Pay special attention to the following significant changes:

*   leadership change,
*   reorganization,
*   change of legal or actual address.

These parameters are extremely important, as they are usually the first steps in the event of bankruptcy. Of course, it is necessary to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the partner's enterprise. But, if you have identified one or more of these changes, we recommend using the algorithm that is used at the stage when the contract has not yet been concluded.

Alarms
------

*   Change of chief accountant or financial director. It may not be connected in any way with the financial problems of the counterparty, however, in combination with other indicators, this may indicate that it was difficult for the employee to work in the company, or that he does not want to be held responsible for any illegal actions.
*   Reducing the company's turnover. Sometimes this means that the main working capital is transferred to a new legal entity, and the old counterparty may simply be abandoned.
*   Loss of key employees. If significant employees of the counterparty company began to leave it in large numbers, this clearly indicates serious problems.
*   A large number of claims against the counterparty for the recovery of large sums. If there are a lot of claims against the company, it means that it does its job poorly. Which may indicate, among other things, its insufficient solvency.
*   Enforcement proceedings against a counterparty with a large amount of debt. A large amount of debt most often means that the company was unable to repay it on time. Which means she's in financial trouble. Therefore, she is unlikely to be able to pay off with you as a supplier of goods or services. Often, settlements with counterparties are not put in the first place in importance. Therefore, remember that your partner can pay on priority debts (salary, taxes), but delay payments to counterparties.

Such non-obvious changes, such as, for example, changing landline numbers to mobile ones, can also indicate problems in the company. At first glance, it may seem that this is a way to optimize work. However, most often such a step is taken by companies that are preparing to disappear.

{{<ads>}}

Assessment of the debt structure
--------------------------------

Constant control and analysis of receivables is one of the main tasks of any commercial enterprise. To solve it, you should regularly generate reports on the status of debts, their size and composition. The structure of receivables includes:

*   indebtedness on advances given to suppliers on account of future deliveries;
*   debt on settlements with accountable persons;
*   debts of counterparties for goods or services received;
*   overpayment of taxes to the budget;
*   VAT calculations;
*   overpayment of insurance premiums;
*   outstanding loans;
*   other debt of the company.

Each of these items must be analyzed not only as an independent type, but also together with other types of receivables. Assessing the debt structure will allow you to identify the weaknesses of the company and allocate more time and resources to work with them.

**Debt Analysis Sequence**

1.  Analysis of the structure of receivables.
2.  Analysis of debt by maturity.
3.  Analysis of the types of debt and its share as a percentage in total assets.
4.  Calculation of asset turnover indicators.
5.  Assessment of debt growth rates and its correlation with revenue growth rates.
6.  Analysis of the ratio of receivables and payables.

Optimization of work with receivables in a crisis
-------------------------------------------------

The formation of package solutions and individual credit limits, as well as work with deferred payments should be your priorities in dealing with receivables during a crisis. If on points, the following actions are important:

1.  It is better to remove payment deferrals for counterparties or at least reduce the available periods. Such measures will only strengthen the financial stability of your company in a crisis. If it is impossible to reduce the deferred payment limits, it is necessary to create conditions that encourage counterparties to prepay (for example, small discounts when prepaying goods or services).
2.  Credit limits should also be reduced, especially if it is planned to reduce the volume of sales of goods and services. We also recommend introducing flexibility into the company's commercial policy when dealing with such limits. For example, if one of the counterparties' financial condition worsened and you had to revise its limits, they must be redistributed to counterparties that are in a more stable position.
3.  Be sure to revise the terms of the contracts so that counterparties do not consider your company as a free creditor, and establish liability for late payment.
4.  The general optimization of work with receivables involves the introduction of a set of measures into the company's policy to maintain its financial stability. Among them is a deep analysis of counterparties when interacting with them, as well as control over payment on time.
