---
title: "Everything goes to hell: how a startup can withstand a crisis"
description: "Startups are the first to be hit by a crisis: its founders often do not have any financial cushion, and there is not enough experience to survive it. How to cope with difficulties, says Ekaterina Petrova, director of GenerationS"
date: 2022-06-11T14:02:30+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T14:02:30+08:00
images:
- vXnqYJq.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Pexels'
authors:
- Ekaterina Petrova
interest: management
channel: 
- business strategy
- venture industry and startups
- instructions
tags: 
---

In a crisis, a startup, like any other company, can face a number of difficulties. I will list the main ones.

**1\. Reduced demand**

Customers are reviewing their needs, and companies are optimizing budgets. Perhaps your target audience will narrow, and the demand for products will not be as high as you planned. According to the National Research University Higher School of Economics, for example, in mid-2020, during the pandemic, small and medium-sized businesses noted a drop in demand for products by more than 70%. Today, against the backdrop of a deteriorating economic situation, demand is falling in many industries, in particular in the auto business, insurance, and real estate.

According to a joint study by the Chek Index analytical resource and OFD Platform, a fiscal data operator, in April 2022, a drop in business turnover compared to last year occurred in all sectors, except for two: grocery sales in a convenience store and sales of goods for construction and cottages. True, this has not yet caused a mass closure of companies: the business is hiding.

**2\. Failures in the work of services**

The suspension of Western services in Russia has most likely added worries to your IT team. HSE experts believe that sanctions pose a threat to the development of the digital economy in Russia, because none of its main components - artificial intelligence, the Internet of things and 5G communication networks - can develop without international cooperation.

The state has already allowed parallel imports, but further support measures are needed. After all, a complete transition to domestic equipment and software is impossible: many analogues that can replace imported products are not yet available in Russia.

There is another danger: in the wake of growing demand for Russian software, dozens of companies may appear offering either a low-quality product or foreign developments in a new domestic “wrapper”. Therefore, the choice of new contractors and suppliers should be treated with the utmost care.

{{<ads>}}

**3\. Breakdowns of agreements**

The agreed terms of deliveries and payments are shifted. You may not receive the equipment you are waiting for, and your investor may refuse the deal or revise plans. Therefore, it is worth following the steps taken by the government. In particular, in May, leading news agencies reported that the Ministry of Finance was considering the possibility of introducing a special procedure for terminating transactions without paying penalties and fines. So the losses here may not be as global as it seemed two months ago.

**4\. Freezing projects and plans**

Cancellation of planned events, adjustment of the strategy of joint projects and withdrawal of partners from the market - all this can worsen your development prospects in the coming months. The most striking examples of recent months are the sale of business by McDonald's and the Polish concern LPP. The partners of the companies had to first completely freeze their projects, and then re-build interaction with new counterparties.

**5\. Financial difficulties**

Restructuring plans requires resources, including material ones. Difficulties with money transfers and other restrictions may put you in serious financial trouble. It is possible that your hopes for investors who are now radically changing their strategies, suspending or temporarily freezing transactions will not come true. It is difficult to make forecasts for the coming years, but a decrease in investment flow or its reorientation to China and Asian countries will almost certainly happen, because they have not joined the sanctions against Russia.

**6\. Stress and unproductiveness**

In a stressful situation, each team member will behave in his own way: someone will mobilize, someone will withdraw into himself, and someone will panic - all this is normal. But during the adaptation period, the productivity of the entire team may decrease.

What steps will help you stay afloat?
-------------------------------------

**1\. Make an anti-crisis plan.**

In times of uncertainty, your team needs guidance. Therefore, make an anti-crisis plan. Its main points can be:

*   a clear understanding of whether your company continues to develop in the chosen direction or refocuses on new niches;
*   increasing marketing activity and customer search - during a period of turbulence, when many of your competitors leave the market, you can really expand your customer base, although sometimes it's hard to believe;
*   reorientation of marketing to active sales;
*   reduction of all possible non-core expenses, expenses for administrative and economic activities, etc.
*   search for new partners who are not under sanctions or are residents of countries friendly to Russia, and building new supply chains.

{{<ads>}}

**2\. Review your income and expenses plan.**

The old business plan will have to be abandoned, at least until the end of the crisis. Reduce the planning period to a few weeks. You can make a 13-week plan (three months and one week). Otkritie Bank experts also advise monitoring the initiatives of the Government of the Russian Federation, which quickly responds to restrictions in the economy and offers business support measures.

If possible, create a financial airbag. If you now want to take out a loan, the bank will make a decision on its issuance longer than usual. In this case, the rate may be higher than you expected. Therefore, it is good to have a financial reserve for at least two or three months. Also, take a closer look at cryptocurrencies and the opportunities they provide.

**3\. Save the team.**

It will not be easy to do this: at the end of April, specialists from the Institute of Economics of the Russian Academy of Sciences discussed the situation on the labor market and noted that a particularly active outflow is now taking place in industries that are associated with the international business community. Here's how to proceed:

*   Be extremely honest with employees. Clearly describe to them the current situation and prospects.
*   Impose a temporary moratorium on political topics. At the same time, do not confuse a moratorium with a ban on having your own position. Don't fire people with "wrong opinions", just ask all employees to refrain from political topics in the office.
*   Try to support the experts. Of course, now the employees will most of all appreciate the financial support. For example, Yandex announced at the end of February that it would pay all employees, including interns, financial compensation in the amount of their salary. If there is no way to help employees financially, then turn to other types of motivation - for example, give those who wish the opportunity to work remotely or entrust an interesting area of ​​\\u200b\\u200bactivity. Any step towards the team in a crisis is very important.

**4\. Look for new opportunities.**

Clients' refusal to cooperate, delivery delays and the departure of foreign services from Russia can hit your business hard. Look for new sources of income, such as foreign partners from friendly countries. Everyone is already talking about expanding cooperation with China, but this is not the only vector. For example, at the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum, which will be held in June, special events are being prepared for the countries of Latin America. You may well look for partners there. You can even make a pivot, that is, change the concept of a startup. For example, the company Kale, which was created for healthy lifestyle consultations, quickly refocused and now specializes in mental health.

Where to look for support
-------------------------

**1\. Free consultations**

Seek help from an expert or the Federal Corporation for Small and Medium Enterprises.

**2\. State grants and subsidies**

Explore sites:

*   to support small and medium businesses;
*   the Central Bank, where all possible financial support programs are accumulated : from concessional lending systems to venture financing;

Remember that in a crisis it is better not to take loans. If you are attracting venture capital, then pay attention to Asian and Arab funds. So, in May, at the Russia-Islamic World: KazanSummit summit, an impressive figure sounded: according to forecasts, by the end of 2022, the volume of UAE investments in the Russian economy will reach $1 billion. In Asia, you can pay attention to funds from Singapore and Hong Kong.

{{<ads>}}

**3\. Tax breaks**

So far, the IT industry has received the most favorable tax conditions. But even if your business is not related to information technology in any way, you can still take advantage of the benefits. Thus, the government canceled scheduled inspections, including in the field of currency legislation, introduced a moratorium on bankruptcies at the initiative of the creditor, compensates for the costs associated with the functioning of payment systems.

**4\. Corporate help**

Large corporations from various industries continue to work with innovative projects. For example, Russian Post and Rosatom cooperate with the Skolkovo Foundation, MMK regularly organizes an internal accelerator, and MTS has MTS StartUp Hub, a platform for developing technology projects. Lenta announced its intention to continue working with startups, and Uralsib announced its intention to complete the pilot projects it had started. 

During the crisis, many market participants not only perform direct functions, but also help start-ups. There is a pragmatic calculation in this: after leaving it, the assistants will have innovative projects in their piggy bank.

**Author:** *Ekaterina Petrova, Director of the GenerationS corporate innovation platform*