---
title: "Europe has imposed an oil embargo. What will happen to the shares of LUKOIL"
description: LUKOIL came under the threat of an embargo imposed by the European Union on Russian oil. The company refused to publish a quarterly report and pay dividends. Understanding the problems faced by the oil and gas giant.
date: 2022-06-09T02:32:48+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-09T02:32:48+08:00
images:
- bwzuKMc.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- 
interest: investments
channel: 
- shares
- forecasts
tags: 
---

LUKOIL remains one of the largest publicly traded vertically integrated oil and gas companies in the world. However, its position may worsen the oil embargo that the European Union has imposed on Russia. The company has already refused to publish a report for the first quarter of 2022, and also postponed the issue of dividends.

However, experts are optimistic. Natalya Milchakova, a leading analyst at Freedom Finance, believes that the current state of LUKOIL's business does not cause concern, and on the contrary, it allows the corporation to survive difficult times without significant consequences.

“LUKOIL is the second largest company in Russia in terms of oil production with a market share of 15%, the fourth in Russia in terms of natural gas production, it owns licenses for fields that in total contain 0.5% of all world hydrocarbon reserves. So the company has an “airbag,” says the expert.

According to Dmitry Puchkarev, an expert on the stock market at BCS Mir Investments, LUKOIL did not publish financial statements, so one can only make assumptions about the state of affairs. The analyst admits that the state of LUKOIL's business is now stable. Possible problems with logistics and difficulties in selling products to the EU can be offset by high oil prices. At the end of 2021, the financial condition was stable, the situation is unlikely to have changed much, the analyst concluded.

{{<ads>}}

## Purchase of Shell assets

LUKOIL [bought](https://quote.rbc.ru/news/short_article/628df2209a794729b82aedac) a Russian subsidiary from the British-Dutch Shell. The network of Shell gas stations in Russia consisted of more than 370 gas stations in 28 cities. In addition to gas stations, LUKOIL will receive a lubricants plant in Torzhok with a capacity of 200 million liters per year. The plant produces engine oils, oils for marine engines, industrial lubricants, hydraulic and transmission oils. The purchase price was not disclosed.

“The purchase of the Shell gas station network by LUKOIL looks positive in the long run, and the company will be able to compete with others in one of the most profitable regions - Moscow and the Moscow Region,” says Sergei Davydov, Finam investment consultant. At the same time, the expert draws attention to the fact that LUKOIL did not disclose the details of the purchase, and it may significantly affect the company's free cash flow and debt load, which may also affect future dividend payments.

Dmitry Puchkarev suggests that the key factor in favor of concluding a deal could be the price of the asset. “Shell needed to leave Russia, so the company could sell its network at a discount. Most likely, it was beneficial for LUKOIL. The deal will allow the company to expand its distribution network in Russia by approximately 17% and increase its market share,” Puchkarev said.

Natalya Milchakova estimates the growth of LUKOIL's share in the retail market after the purchase of Shell filling stations by 2 percentage points. At the same time, Milchakova draws the attention of investors to the fact that now LUKOIL will have to very quickly increase the supply of its petroleum products to the acquired filling stations, since Shell previously purchased gasoline and diesel fuel from the Russian company's competitors.

{{<ads>}}

## Oil embargo

LUKOIL is an exporting company. The share of exports in revenue for 2021 was about 85%, and oil, gas and refined products are sold to more than 100 countries. Therefore, for the company, the introduction of an embargo on oil exports can be a blow.

In the sixth package of sanctions adopted last week, European countries also included a ban on the purchase, import and transfer of crude oil and petroleum products from Russia. However, a transitional period is provided: until December 5, 2022, “one-off” transactions for the import or execution of contracts for the purchase of Russian oil concluded before June 4 are allowed; for petroleum products, similar transactions are possible until February 5, 2023. A temporary exemption has also been made for crude oil imports via pipeline.

“Given the current package of sanctions, the company’s business model is subject to partial restrictions, and there is a possibility of losing not only the sales market, but also the oil refining business itself, as well as foreign filling stations,” says Sergey Davydov. According to the analyst, now one can only guess how much the business will suffer, but according to financial indicators, the company may lose up to 30-35% of revenue. Davydov also believes that it will be much more difficult to rebuild the sales market to the Asian direction in the future, and high competition and low selling prices will significantly affect LUKOIL's free cash flow and revenue.

Natalya Milchakova says that even a partial oil embargo will not affect all Russian oil companies in the best way. However, the expert assumes that all industry leaders will have the opportunity to redirect export flows from Europe to Asia, including India and China, which, according to OPEC forecasts, will provide a quarter of world oil demand by 2030.

## Dividends

Investors often call LUKOIL a dividend aristocrat - the company has increased dividends every year. Although the pandemic prevented it from retaining this title, Lukoil had a generous dividend policy that attracted private investors. Thus, according to the company's rules, LUKOIL pays investors 100% of free cash flow after interest payments, repayment of lease obligations and share buybacks. The company made payments twice a year.

Despite the fact that the growth of dividend payments was expected to continue, the military escalation of the conflict in Ukraine and sanctions have radically changed the situation with dividends. As a result, the Board of Directors of LUKOIL decided to postpone the payment of the final dividends for 2021 due to "unstable business conditions and restrictions in the accounting and banking systems." The Board of Directors recommended to the shareholders' meeting that the remaining 2021 profit after the payment of interim dividends be retained. In addition, the Board of Directors will consider recommendations for the payment of final dividends for 2021 no later than the end of 2022.

According to Sergey Davydov, taking into account the significant uncertainty, LUKOIL will not be able to return to paying dividends under the old scheme in the near future. “The return of the company to the payment is possible with a reduction in sanctions risks and an understanding of the sale of petroleum products in key markets,” says Davydov.

Dmitry Puchkarev believes that the probability of returning to the payment of dividends in 2022 is quite high. “The low debt burden and high oil prices should offset the negative effect of the sanctions, thereby allowing a return to the distribution of dividends,” the expert says.

Natalya Milchakova believes that dividends can still be paid for 2021. “The likelihood that LUKOIL will return to paying dividends as early as this year is quite high, since the corporation has abandoned the moratorium on bankruptcy in order to retain the right to pay dividends,” says Milchakova. According to the expert, LUKOIL did not refuse to pay dividends for 2021, but simply postponed it until the end of this year, apparently so as not to expose shareholders to risk if, for example, any banks stop processing payments from Russian oil companies due to sanctions.

{{<ads>}}

What will happen to the shares of the company
---------------------------------------------

Sergey Davydov believes that LUKOIL's significant uncertainty regarding the sale of oil products and gas supplies continues to put pressure on its shares. According to the analyst, the resumption of the publication of financial statements can return the positive view of investors on the company's papers.

According to Dmitry Puchkarev, the determining factors for LUKOIL shares now are the sanctions agenda, oil prices and the ruble exchange rate. On the horizon of several months, when the sentiment stabilizes, the paper may return to a level above **4,750 rubles** .

According to the forecast of Freedom Finance analysts, before the end of the year, LUKOIL shares may return to the level of 4,400 rubles.
