---
title: "5 managerial mistakes that will lead the company to collapse"
description: Leaders today are in an environment where it is important to act strategically. But not everyone is up to the challenge. What prevents them and what mistakes it leads to, says Natalia Vasina (STR Suite)
date: 2022-06-11T17:03:12+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T17:03:12+08:00
images:
- Iou7UXX.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Natalia Vasina
interest: management
channel: 
- team management
tags: 
---

Mistake No. 1: cut not only the budget, but also the staff, bonuses
-------------------------------------------------------------------

In a crisis, companies begin to cut costs, which, of course, affects the staff, putting twice as much on employees, even if they do not have the right experience and resources for this. As a result, people work in conditions of total overload and extreme stress, which leads to fatigue and, as a result, to mistakes. Therefore, with serious layoffs, even the most effective decisions of the leader may be implemented late or not in the way he sees it.

### Recommendation

Try to keep the size of the staff as much as possible, but make sure that each team member brings value and makes a serious contribution to the implementation of the anti-crisis strategy. To do this, it is necessary to evaluate the effectiveness of the current structure of the organization and make appropriate changes by analyzing the workload of employees, their responsibilities and the distribution of powers.

If necessary, partially or even completely change the team, first of all, so that the values ​​of the team members coincide 100% with the values ​​of the leader. And of course, it is very important that all team members have the ability not only to understand, but also to formulate and implement strategic business objectives in accordance with the vision of the leader.

{{<ads>}}

It is also worth evaluating the effectiveness of the current material and non-material motivation in order to adjust it according to the current situation, which will help retain valuable personnel.

It is important not only to find the “right” people, but also to provide them with as many opportunities as possible. Your team must fully contribute to the development of strategies and decision making at every stage of implementation. This will help you find non-obvious solutions or approaches that you have not even thought about before.

**Example** . At the height of the crisis in 2008, the decline in the clothing market in Russia reached 40%. Domestic brands could not compete with cheap Chinese and Turkish brands. Under these conditions, the management of Gloria Jeans decided to close 21 regional offices, but to double the number of sales representatives in the regions: from 120 to 250; the released employees were transferred to production, and a system of individual motivation was introduced. This made it possible to save about $8 million and double the market share and EBITDA due to the fact that managers attracted buyers directly and invested the freed funds in local production.

Mistake No. 2: remain opaque and authoritarian in actions
---------------------------------------------------------

The conditions of uncertainty impose special requirements on the leader, which entails the need to possess special qualities. It is not enough to be an expert in your field and rely on many years, albeit very successful, experience. Very few people are able to be flexible, adapt to a changing reality and lead a team with their support. Authoritarian management, as well as the lack of an open dialogue, does not bring results in conditions of uncertainty, but only aggravates the situation within the company.

{{<ads>}}

### Recommendation

You need to create an environment that gradually moves from mere delegation (do what I tell you) to emancipation (I give you the freedom to succeed). This does not mean that delegation is not necessary (especially since many leaders need to learn this as well). Proper delegation of the crisis plan and the flexibility to adapt to rapidly changing circumstances are essential to success.

Simplify decision-making and develop clear and understandable rules of the game based on the opinion of the team. Your goals, objectives and methods of their solution should be obvious to everyone - including ordinary employees. This will help regular brainstorming with formal and informal leaders - stakeholders, who can become the conductors of your ideas and additional support for employees in difficult times.

**Example** . Here it is worth remembering Rudy Giuliani, the mayor of New York, who, after the events of September 11, 2001, regularly made appeals and told what the city authorities were doing, and also personally met with representatives of various departments. This helped him to keep abreast of all the problems, establish a system for quick decision-making and keep the situation under control, despite the tremendous pressure from outside.

Mistake #3: Chaos in strategy and planning
------------------------------------------

In a crisis, many either continue to act with proven old methods, or rush to extremes and make decisions chaotically, without creating new multiple strategies. In conditions of uncertainty, each problem is unique. Therefore, acting within habitual patterns - even if they have worked for years - is not always a good solution. But even chaotic changes in course can undermine the company.

### Recommendation

Create a "strategy tree" with several alternative scenarios, switching between them in real time.

Develop a plan for each stage: a preliminary one with an assessment of upcoming risks and resources, a few main ones - when you need to react with lightning speed to a changing context, and a final one - to reflect on how everything went and draw important conclusions for the future. The more strategies you create, including even the most improbable scenarios, the greater the chance of a good result and the lower the risk that problems will catch you by surprise. By acting quickly and decisively, you may make tactical mistakes (which is not terrible), but you will win in achieving a strategic goal.

{{<ads>}}

Before strategizing and making decisions, it is important to make sure that you have all these points and that there are no vulnerabilities or potential risks anywhere. In the process of work, you need to regularly check all **three directions** for strength.

*   How realistic are your goals?
*   What will you gain or lose if you manage to implement them?
*   Do you have enough people and resources?

**Example** . Cisco CEO John Chambers in his book Connecting the Dots. Leadership Lessons" writes that many leaders mistakenly perceive the crisis as a personal tragedy and put themselves at the center of events. As a result, they act on emotions, impulsively and completely out of touch with reality. Whereas it is much more correct to step back, look at the situation from different angles (and through the eyes of others) in order to develop a balanced and diverse strategy. Chambers compares this to how you would make a diagnosis based on a few random symptoms, instead of making a good diagnosis and then coming up with a treatment plan.

Mistake #4: Putting it off until the last minute
------------------------------------------------

Another extreme is an attempt to "freeze", put some processes on pause in order to collect their thoughts and rebuild. It seems that with limited resources, it is better to focus only on what requires immediate action. But in the long run, this often turns into a failure: when you endlessly procrastinate and, as a result, the decision comes too late.

During Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the state of Louisiana for a long time refused to accept assistance from the federals, acting according to standard protocols, which ultimately led to much more disastrous consequences.

### Recommendation

Build priorities for each of the tasks and areas, assess the resources and timing for their implementation, as well as the risks in case of failure. Many processes can be performed in parallel, competently delegating or outsourcing a part.

{{<ads>}}

Mistake #5: Not drawing conclusions
-----------------------------------

During a crisis, many feel uncomfortable and work at the limit of their capabilities. As a result, when everything is already behind, they prefer to forget about it, like a bad dream. But then in the next crisis period you will again step on the same rake, and the solutions that helped this time may not work in other circumstances.

### Recommendation

At each stage, be sure to take stock: analyze the effectiveness of the initial goals and objectives, the actions taken and adjustments, successes and failures. Learn from all of this to better prepare for the next phase.

For those who deal with emergencies on a regular basis (from rescuers and firefighters to fighter pilots and SEALs), the debriefing session is a must and one of the most powerful training tools in the profession.

Crisis - a time of opportunity?
-------------------------------

In difficult times like this, wise leaders come to the fore: those who have the unique ability to see through a changing context and respond flexibly to the most seemingly catastrophic changes. These abilities are innate, and it is precisely such leaders that companies will look for internally, promoting talented employees and giving them greater freedom of action, or from the outside - among top managers of Western companies that have left the Russian market. But this is not a guarantee of success.

{{<ads>}}

During a crisis, a leader has **four main points of support** .

1.  Strategies and goals: where are we going and what do we want to achieve?
2.  People: who will help us achieve our goals?
3.  Resources: how and by what means will we achieve them?
4.  Courage: the ability to make effective decisions regardless of the presence of fears. Courage is one of the best moral qualities inherent in a person; It is from courage that the readiness to defend the interests of business, one's loved ones and, of course, one's country stems.

In conditions of uncertainty, all four inputs can constantly change. However, none of these points should be overlooked, otherwise you will lose your footing and will not be able to go through this difficult path, even if you are a successful leader with all the necessary qualities.

**Author:** *Natalia Vasina, STR Suite partner*