---
title: "“Big Sale”: TOP-10 American watch-list companies"
description: The bear market has caused many to watch with dismay the shrinking portfolios. But experienced investors know that it is a drawdown that gives a good chance to enter the securities of good companies cheaply. Consider which of them deserve attention and why
date: 2022-06-07T18:07:42+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-07T18:12:42+08:00
images:
- 1xT1jjh.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shannon Stapleton/Reuters'
authors:
- Natalya Malykh
interest: investment
channel: 
- shares
tags: 
- Finam Investment Company
---

The correction has affected many companies, but some of them have become good candidates for the watch-list to buy. Even if the economy does not feel good for a while due to the Ukrainian crisis, higher interest rates and inflation, there are industries that will continue to develop due to long-term trends. Today, the state of the market resembles a period of sales: when the papers of companies can be bought at a good price.

Our sympathies are with companies whose business is supported by the growth of their industry, can generate their own cash flows sustainably and are not heavily dependent on external funding. Buyback programs will also help to retain investors now.

**Qualcomm,** as one of the world leaders in the development of chipsets and communication technologies, is among the main beneficiaries of 5G coverage expansion. Snapdragon chips are at the heart of almost all flagship Android smartphones, and the situation is unlikely to change given the company's heavy investment in R&D. In addition, business diversification is bearing fruit: for example, after the takeover of the Swedish Veoneer, Qualcomm has every chance of becoming a leader in the automotive chipset market within a few years. In addition to NTM's dividend yield of about 2%, the company regularly conducts share buybacks, the approved amount of which is $9.1 billion (5.8% capitalization). Our current recommendation for QCOM is BUY with a target of $223 and 60% upside.

**Visa** is the operator of the largest international payment system operating in more than 200 countries and uniting over 15,000 financial institutions. Visa's financial performance in the second financial quarter ended in March was strong, reflecting a strong recovery in US and global economic activity following the coronavirus crisis. Revenue grew by 25.5% yoy to $7.2bn, adjusted net income grew by 26.6% to $3.8bn. The company benefits from a liquid balance (net debt/EBITDA is only 0.4x) and the ability to generate high cash flow, which allows it to direct significant funds to shareholder payments.

Global digital payment volumes are expected to continue to grow rapidly in the medium term and Visa, given its leadership position in the sector, will continue to be one of the main beneficiaries of this trend. We have a Buy recommendation on Visa stock with a target price of $282.7, implying 33% upside potential.

{{< ads >}}

**Applied Materials**  is one of the world's leading manufacturers of equipment for the production of semiconductor chips and displays. Supply chain issues across the semiconductor industry are likely to continue to weigh on Applied Materials' financials this year, but we are positive about the long-term outlook.

The use of semiconductor chips in the world will continue to grow rapidly in the coming years, with the deployment of 5G networks and rapidly developing areas such as artificial intelligence, Big Data processing (Big Data), machine learning, cloud computing, virtual / augmented reality, autonomous cars. Against this backdrop, strong global demand for semiconductor equipment can be expected to continue, and Applied Materials, given the company's strong position in the industry, will remain the main beneficiary. We have a Buy recommendation for Applied Materials with a target price of $146, which implies 22% upside potential.

Shares of biotech company **Vertex Pharmaceuticals** have made investors 23% richer since the start of the year, and despite the impressive performance, we still view Vertex as fundamentally undervalued. The company's cystic fibrosis drugs remain unrivaled and continue to prolong the lives of patients with this hereditary autosomal recessive disease, and the sales geography retains significant expansion potential. Vertex has very impressive prospects for revenue and profit growth in the coming years. Our target price for the security is $333.10 at the end of 2022, upside is 21.7%, the recommendation is “buy”.

**Microsoft Corp.** is one of the leading providers of cloud platforms and related cloud services. In the second quarter of fiscal year 2022, Microsoft's total revenue exceeded expectations and showed an increase of 18% year-on-year, to $49.4 billion, with revenue of the Microsoft Cloud cloud platform reaching a record $23.4 billion (up 32% year-on-year). According to the CEO, Microsoft customers do not plan to cut the budget for the use of cloud services and digital transformation, which is certainly positive for the corporation. Microsoft, thanks to its ecosystem of services and modern technologies, has already created and is exploiting the b2b metaverse with might and main. Microsoft could close its $68.7 billion acquisition of video game developer Activision Blizzard in early 2023, subject to regulatory approval. This deal will allow the company to participate in the growing gaming industry. We have a Buy recommendation for Microsoft stock with a target price of $354.31, which implies upside potential of 30%.

**Alphabet** in terms of revenue growth, it has shown the best performance among FAANG companies over the past four quarters. Alphabet's advertising revenue in the first quarter of 2022 increased by 22% year-on-year and remains the company's main source of income, despite some losses due to the Ukraine conflict. As for the cloud segment, which showed 44% year-on-year growth in the first quarter of 2022, Alphabet will further strengthen its leadership through the acquisition of Mandiant and the expansion of its cybersecurity portfolio. Alphabet is one of the top companies in the US in terms of buyback volume - over the past 12 months. with the end of March 31, Alphabet bought back its own shares for a total of $52 billion, which is just over 3% of the company's capitalization. Additionally, the board of directors approved an increase in buyback by another $70 billion. The upcoming stock split will also be a growth driver. We have a Buy recommendation for Alphabet stock with a target price of $2,819, which implies 25% upside potential.

**The Walt Disney Company** is one of the largest media holdings in the world. At the end of the second quarter of fiscal year 2022, Disney presented a fairly strong report. We especially highlight the fact that the Disney+ streaming service continues to actively increase its audience against the backdrop of an outflow of subscribers from its main competitor Netflix. In addition, amusement parks have posted four consecutive quarters of double-digit growth, bringing Disney's total revenue over the past 12 months to 2x. exceeded pre-documentary levels. Starting in the summer of 2021, parks in the United States will operate without restrictions on attendance. Amusement park revenue will continue to grow in the coming quarters, including the reopening of parks in Shanghai and Hong Kong after the end of the lockdown. Globally, the coronavirus pandemic is already fading into the background, and Disney is a direct beneficiary of this situation. In fiscal 2022, Disney's revenue and EBITDA are forecast to grow by 25%, while net income will double. We recommend taking a long-term look at Disney stock.

{{< ads >}}

We count shares of the **First Trust NASDAQ Cybersecurity ETF** interesting to buy in the conditions of the heated geopolitical situation. Since the beginning of 2022, cyberattacks have become more frequent both on corporate networks and on networks/websites/platforms of government organizations and government agencies around the world. At the beginning of March, a record $272 million weekly ETF inflow since the fund's inception was recorded, which once again confirms the high interest in the cybersecurity industry from the investment community. Ensuring the proper level of information security in organizations is inextricably linked to digital transformation, since the cloud working environment and the data stored in the cloud are vulnerable to cyber attacks. According to Global Market Insights forecasts, the global market for cybersecurity solutions will double from 2021 to 2027 and reach $400 billion.

**The iShares Global Clean Energy ETF** targets equity investments in the growing renewable energy sector, which includes predominantly wind, solar, hydro, hydrogen and biofuel energy. The key long-term source of growth in this sector is the plans of the largest countries to achieve carbon neutrality in the next 30–40 years in order to fulfill the Paris Agreement aimed at curbing global warming. At the same time, in the medium term, "green" energy can become one of the main ways for the EU to reduce its dependence on Russian hydrocarbons. Against this background, we recommend buying this ETF with a target price of $29.45, which corresponds to an upside of 46%.

According to the results of the last reporting quarter, **Apple** again managed to exceed market expectations, despite the increased risks associated with the ongoing lockdowns in China and the company's withdrawal from the Russian Federation. We expect that as the epidemiological situation in China normalizes, Apple will again be able to return to double-digit revenue growth, and the continued increase in the share of services in the sales structure will favorably affect the company's gross margin. Other important drivers include growth in 5G coverage, new products, transition to proprietary technology, and a share buyback that has approved program size in excess of $90 billion (4% capitalization). Our recommendation for Apple shares is Buy with a target of $205 and 38% upside.

**Author:** *Natalya Malykh, Head of the Equity Analysis Department of FG Finam*