---
title: "Import substitution test: how, while expanding, not to be left without profit"
description: Few of the leaders of modern enterprises have solved the problems associated with the explosive growth of demand. Because of the sanctions, such challenges will affect many. Alexey Evsyagin, CEO of BFG Group, spoke about the pitfalls of forced import substitution and how to avoid them
date: 2022-06-10T08:51:58+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-10T08:51:58+08:00
images:
- dsyQ5RW.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Alexey Evsyagin
interest: management
channel: 
- modern management techniques
- instructions
tags: 
---

Domestic industry has an opportunity to repeat the success of agriculture, which has grown impressively since 2014, after the first sanctions were announced and counter-sanctions were put forward.

A new round of tension caused a sharp demand for everything domestic. This is forcing industrial enterprises to increase their capacities in an emergency mode. For example, there are factories whose orders for this year have doubled or tripled.

How to organize the work in such a way that the products are delivered on time at a competitive price, and not to sacrifice profitability for the sake of production growth?

"Black box" production
----------------------

Each new production project is a “black box” for management.

How many machines and workers will be needed to produce the required quantity? What new equipment should be added to the existing one? Will we have to open new workshops or will it be enough to organize the second and third shifts in the existing areas? The answers to these questions determine the amount of additional investment in capacity building and, ultimately, the profitability of the project.

{{<ads>}}

The decision is usually made on the basis of previous experience and intuition of managers. But few of today's managers have already fully solved the problems associated with the explosive growth in the number of orders and the need to quickly rebuild production.

On the one hand, the capacities of many factories created in the Soviet era are still used at half capacity. It would seem that here it is - a long-awaited chance to download them in full. But it is worth starting to form this program, as it turns out that few people know the real possibilities of old machines. And this is just one of the problems that lie in wait.

In a similar situation, there have already been investors who in recent years have acquired and converted old production sites for the production of import-substituting products. So far, not all of these projects have paid for themselves, as they developed on the basis of erroneous forecasts leading to resource overruns.

But, on the other hand, there are examples when it was possible to reach mass production and sustainable profitability. As a rule, the union of managerial experience with computer simulation of production led to this: modern IT technologies make it possible, for example, to create a digital twin of a plant - to introduce a set of software solutions in which production processes are simulated as real. This allows using artificial intelligence to analyze dozens of options for action proposed by management and choose the best options from them.

Growth Mistakes
---------------

The initiators of projects to expand production and develop new products step on the same rake over and over again:

*   incorrectly identify the bottleneck where work needs to be reorganized;
*   incorrectly assess the need for additional staff;
*   by eye determine the batches of orders that should be in production;
*   cannot fully load production and get too low equipment efficiency;
*   due to the low efficiency of the equipment, they receive a high cost of production.

{{<ads>}}

These are the most common traps that lie in wait for a plant that is increasing output. And even quite successful practices that previously helped to anticipate and overcome them do not work in the new situation. The conditions for fulfilling orders and the economic environment around enterprises change so much and often. Indeed, for example, a production that produces ten sleds and 20 scooters every day has one bottleneck, while the same production, but with a different order structure, may already have another bottleneck.

Each reconfiguration of the production line is not only an opportunity to release new products, but also the risk of wasting time in the process of installing new equipment. And what if we add changes in Russian economic legislation, unpredictable but periodic local and global crises? Too many different variables to consider.

For example, one machine-building enterprise, where the number of orders increased this spring, was puzzled by the recruitment of new workers. However, when the forecast of factory economists for additional staff was cross-checked with a digital twin, it turned out that it was overestimated by 1.7 times. In a year, this would have resulted in tens of millions of rubles, additionally needed for salaries, social benefits and taxes.

Business machine efficiency
---------------------------

If we recall the history of import substitution in the agro-industrial complex, then in the first years after the introduction of restrictions on meat imports in Russia, prices for domestic pork and beef grew at an accelerated pace. Economists explain this process by an increase in the investment component in the cost of production, the production of which is increasing. There is a danger that the rise in prices for import-substituting industrial products will also accelerate.

But even more strongly the cost depends on labor productivity. Obviously, it is lower in enterprises where more products are produced per square meter. And in this case, without sacrificing profits, it can set prices for its products that are more comfortable for consumers and increase revenue by increasing its market share.

{{<ads>}}

In the difficult situation in which the Russian economy finds itself today, the efficiency of industrial production depends on a combination of many external and internal factors. The implementation of the planned plans can be slowed down by macroeconomic parameters that the company's management cannot influence: inflation, the dollar exchange rate, the severity of the sanctions regime and the amount of state support in the industry.

It is all the more important to ensure the smooth operation of equipment and the efficiency of production processes, giving priority to critical and most effective activities:

*   reliable maintenance of equipment, and above all, imported equipment, the difficulties in obtaining spare parts for which arose under sanctions;
*   strengthening the protection of robotic lines and corporate IT systems from hacker attacks, which increased sharply after February 24;
*   improving production processes by introducing lean manufacturing methods;
*   optimizing the use of resources and improving the efficiency of project planning;
*   selection of highly qualified technical and managerial personnel;
*   making the right decisions using the capabilities of modern technologies.

**Author:** *Alexey Evsyagin, CEO of BFG Group*