---
title: "“Virus of Doubt” and a little empathy: the secrets of storytelling from Steve Jobs"
description: Tony Fadell is Apple’s former VP, “father of the iPod” and founder of the startup bought by Google for $3.2 billion. In his new book, he shares a wealth of experience and explains in one of the chapters why Steve Jobs’ presentations were so special.
date: 2022-06-12T22:56:21+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T22:56:21+08:00
images:
- FHwJ7ya.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Tomohiro Ohsumi / Getty Images'
authors:
- Tony Fadell
interest: self development
channel: 
- flexible skills
- fast company
tags: 
---

Each product should have its own story - an explanation of why it should exist and how it will solve the problems of potential customers. A good story has three elements:

*   appeals to the rational and emotional components of a person;
*   gives a simple explanation of complex concepts;
*   reminds people of the problem, the solution of which answers the question "why".

The story of your product, your company, your vision should be at the heart of everything you do.

I remember sitting in the same room where Steve Jobs told the world about the iPhone in 2007.

Everyone remembers that fragment of his speech. Forcing intrigue and an unexpected ending - it was a brilliant combination. Many still write articles about that presentation, some even celebrated its tenth anniversary.

But the second part of the speech was no less important. Steve reminded the audience of the problem that Apple is solving for them: “They say the most advanced phones are called smartphones. But the thing is, they're not that smart and they're not that easy to use." He talked for a while about conventional mobile phones and smartphones and the shortcomings of each before moving on to the specifications of the new iPhone.

Steve used what I later called the “doubt virus.” You remind them of the little disappointments that everyone faces in their daily lives, and make them feel annoyed about it over and over again. “Maybe my experience is not as good as I thought. What if it could be better?" \- if you made a person think about it, infected him with the "virus of doubt", then he will be interested in the solution to the problem that you offer. You evoke negative emotions about the existing order of things so that people will be encouraged to accept the new one.

Steve was a master at this. Before telling you about the action of a particular product, he always explained why you need it. And it all looked so natural, so easy.

I have watched other company executives give presentations, and they often have little understanding of what their supposedly revolutionary product is. Sometimes they didn't even know how to properly hold it in their hands. In the case of Steve's presentations, clients and the press have always been delighted. “It's just magic,” they said. He is so calm, so collected. No prepared speeches, slides with almost no words - he just knows what he's talking about, and that's why everything works out so smoothly.

It never looked like memorized speech. It looked like a dialogue. Like history.

{{<ads>}}

And the reason for this is simple: Steve's presentations are not just a scripted presentation. This is a story that he had been telling us, his friends and relatives in one form or another for months during the development process. He constantly worked on it, improved it. If he saw that the audience did not understand him or asked to clarify something, then he improved his story, changed something somewhere, made it more understandable.

This was the history of the product, and it determined its further development.

If some part of the story does not resonate with the audience, then the product is also not all right and it will need to be finalized. As a result, this is why the iPhone had a glass front panel instead of a plastic one and there was no hardware keyboard. Because the story of the “Jesus phone,” as the iPhone was later called, would not hold water if it scratched the first time you put it in your pocket, or if the user had to watch movies on a small screen. We told a story about a phone that would change everything. So this is exactly the device we had to create.

And when I say history, I don't just mean words.

The story of your product is its design, its features, images and videos, customer reviews, reviews from critics, conversations with support agents. This is the totality of emotions in relation to the thing that you have created.

The story is not only there to sell your product. It is needed to help you better define its essence, purpose and understand your customers. This is what you say to investors to convince them to give you money; new employees - to convince them to become part of your team; partners - to convince them to work with you; press - to convince her that she cares. And ultimately, it's what you tell your customers to convince them to buy the product.

And it all starts with the question "why". Why does this thing have to exist? Why is it important? Why do people need it? Why will they love her?

To answer these “whys”, you need to understand the essence of the problem you are trying to solve, to delve into the situation that your customers regularly face.

And you should always remember these “whys”, even when you are already doing the “what” - creating programs, innovations and solutions to all kinds of consumer problems. Because the longer you work on an idea, the more important the “what” is to you. The "why" becomes so obvious, so intuitive, that you don't even have to formulate the answer anymore. You forget how significant this is.

When you are focused on the "what" question, you run ahead of the engine. You are sure that what is obvious to everyone is obvious to you. But it is not. Nobody works on a product like you do for weeks, months and years. Therefore, you need to pause and clearly articulate the answer to the “why” question. Only in this way will you interest others in your idea.

This applies to any industry, even if you sell b2b payment software. Even if you are engaged in very complex technological developments for which demand has not yet formed. Even if you are selling parts to a factory that has been buying the same thing for 20 years.

There is a fight for market share and a fight for minds. If your competitors are better than you at talking about a product, it doesn't matter if their product is worse. They will draw attention. To any clients, investors, partners or talented employees at a cursory acquaintance, they will seem to be leaders in their category. The more people talk about them, the stronger their influence on the minds and the more people will talk about them.

{{<ads>}}

The power of empathy
--------------------

A good story is a manifestation of empathy. It takes into account the needs of the audience. It combines facts and emotions in such a way that the listener has enough of both. First of all, you need a detailed understanding of your own product so that your arguments do not seem too superficial and unfounded. You have to convince people that you are relying on real data. But you can overdo it. If your story contains only dry facts, then people may agree with you, but your proposal will not seem interesting enough to immediately want to test it personally. Maybe next month. Or maybe next year.

Therefore, you should appeal to their emotions - focus on what worries them, worries, scares them. Or show them an attractive picture of the future. Talk about how a real person will feel using this product, how their daily life will change. Just don't get carried away too much, otherwise your product will be perceived as something new, but not very necessary.

Storytelling is an art. But it is also science.

And never forget that your customers' mindset may be different from yours. Sometimes your rational arguments provoke an emotional reaction. Sometimes your emotional story gives people a rational reason to buy your product. Some clients of Nest Labs (the startup was founded by Tony Fadell and his Apple colleague Matt Rogers in 2010, sold to Google in 2014 for $3.2 billion - _RBC Pro_ ) looked at the beautiful thermostat that we created with love and said : "Well, of course, he's handsome." But the opportunity to save $23 on electricity bills got them really excited, causing a strong emotional reaction.

All people are different. And everyone will perceive the story you tell in their own way.

This is why analogies can be such a useful storytelling tool. They help to easily explain complex concepts, appealing to well-known, familiar phenomena.

This is another thing I learned from Steve Jobs. He always said that analogies give clients superpowers. A good comparison allows the consumer to instantly understand a complex principle and then describe it in conversation with others. That's why the slogan "1000 songs in your pocket" proved to be so effective. Everyone had CDs and cassettes in bulky players that only let you listen to 10-15 songs, one album at a time. Therefore, the slogan “1000 songs in your pocket” stood out strongly: people imagined what had previously seemed impossible - that they could store all their favorite songs on one device. They could easily explain to their friends and family why the new iPod is so cool.

At Nest Labs, we used analogies extensively both on our website and in advertising, as well as in help articles and installation guides. It was necessary. Indeed, in order to understand many features of our products, it was necessary to have a good understanding of the design of heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems, electrical networks, and also to understand that laser sensors can detect a fire. This is knowledge that few people have, so we cheated. We did not try to explain all these complex processes, but simply used understandable analogies.

Four words that played a decisive role
--------------------------------------

I remember there was one complex software feature designed to ease the load on power plants during the hottest and coldest days of the year, when all people turned on the heating or air conditioning at the same time. This usually lasted several days a year, for several hours in the afternoon, even one or more coal-fired power plants had to be started to avoid interruptions in the supply of electricity. So we developed a program that predicted periods of high demand, and Nest Thermostat first increased the power of the air conditioner or heater to "peak" hours, and then reduced it when they arrived. Everyone who joined this program received a discount on their electricity bills.

As more people joined the program, the benefits became clear to everyone. Customers rejoiced that they could save money and energy companies didn't have to run their polluting power plants.

It took me a long time to explain the essence of the problem and its solution. So after countless hours of thinking and going over every possible wording, we settled on four words: "peak-hour savings."

{{<ads>}}

Everyone understands what rush hour is - a moment when too many people gather on the road and traffic slows down terribly. The same thing happens with electricity. No further explanation was needed—no doubt peak hours are a problem, but when the "energy rush hour" hits, you can capitalize on it. You can get compensation. You can really save money, and not hang around in the "energy traffic jam" along with everyone else.

We dedicated a whole page to this on our website, where we placed an image of a car and small power plants working with all their might. We may have exaggerated a little, but we knew that most people wouldn't dig that deep.

For the vast majority of clients, everything was crystal clear. With four words and one analogy, we've helped people understand that the Nest Thermostat can save you money when energy rush hour hits.

This is the story we are telling. Very short, but even better.

Short stories are easy to remember. And, more importantly, they are easy to retell. Your friend will tell their friends about the product, and it will sound more convincing than any advertising. You should always strive to tell your story so well that it ceases to be yours - so that your client learns about it, loves it, goes through it and makes it their story. And then he told it to all his friends.

{{<info>}}
_About the author:_

_Tony Fadell began his 30-year career in Silicon Valley at General Magic startup. Then he led the development of the iPod and iPhone, founded Nest Labs and created the Nest Learning Thermostat "smart" thermostat. During his career, Tony was the author of more than 300 patents. He now heads the investment and advisory firm Future Shape, where he oversees the next generation of startups that are changing the world._
{{</info>}}

###### This material was first published in Fast Company magazine or at [https://www.fastcompany.com/](https://www.fastcompany.com/) . The original article can be read [at the link](https://www.fastcompany.com/90747313/steve-jobs-lessons-tony-fadell-build-book-excerpt) . © 2022. All rights reserved. Material courtesy of Tribune Content Agency.

**Author:** *Tony Fadell*