---
title: "The dark side of leadership. What is good, bad and how to get along with it"
description: "The set of negative personality traits that can manipulate, lie, disregard moral principles and use other people's resources in their own interests is called Machiavellianism. Is it always bad for a manager, expert Anna Chernigov thinks"
date: 2022-06-15T00:50:58+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-15T00:50:58+08:00
images:
- 1njza0b.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Sean Gallup/Getty Images'
authors:
- Anna Chernigova
interest: hr
channel: 
- team management
tags: 
---

Surely you have met people who, in achieving their goals, are guided by the postulate "The end justifies the means." This may be a leader who is ready to set up his subordinates for the sake of career advancement, or a businessman who “drains” a partner in order to obtain a share in the company. In such cases, the person is said to have a certain amount of Machiavellianism.

The negative impact of Machiavellianism in the company
------------------------------------------------------

Machiavellianism is in every person. The only question is how developed these qualities are. You can determine their degree using special Mac tests. The task of people with a high level of Mac is to get what they want, without thinking about the consequences. In a corporate environment, they can use the most **unprincipled ways** to do this :

*   lie to superiors, distort information, substitute colleagues and partners;
*   manipulated: make false promises and do not honor agreements. You can often hear from them "you misunderstood me";
*   put pressure on subordinates or shift their responsibilities to other employees;
*   do not feel shame and guilt, which are the regulators of social behavior;
*   easily violate personal boundaries and use personal information about colleagues to their advantage;
*   devalue other people's merits and are very painful if they do not recognize their own;
*   they do not know how to trust, because they themselves easily deceive and betray;
*   can assert themselves at the expense of weaker employees;
*   treat others from a position of benefit.

Oddly enough, this does not repel other people. Persistence and purposefulness produce an unexpected effect on others - they are admired and envied. Therefore, Machiavellians are never in the shadows. The center of attention is their favorite place.

{{<ads>}}

Benefits of Machiavellianism for business
-----------------------------------------

As Nietzsche wrote, morality destroys the will to power. People devoid of morality go very easily to their goal. They **have pluses** that help them become authoritarian but effective leaders:

*   they try to realize their potential in work. At the same time, they prefer business structures and avoid professions related to the social sphere;
*   possess strategic thinking;
*   have a fairly high level of intelligence;
*   make decisions quickly and coolly, which increases their productivity at work;
*   like to keep everything under control;
*   easily withstand heavy loads, stress, multitasking;
*   in adverse situations they know how to remain calm and prudent;
*   follow a clear hierarchy. They quickly understand who is strong and who is weak in the team, so they can easily differentiate people and delegate the necessary tasks to them;
*   achieve their goals, no matter what;
*   are able to win over those around them;
*   quickly move up the career ladder and occupy strong positions in their organization;
*   have strong enough personal motivation;
*   achieve incredible success in negotiations, building business processes, marketing and consulting. It is quite easy for them to make managerial decisions and delegate tasks.

Machiavellianism in the company
-------------------------------

When hiring, Machiavellians get the desired position quite easily. They know how to direct the conversation in the right direction and predict what kind of candidate the interviewer is looking for.

So that the human factor does not interfere with objectively assessing applicants, many companies provide psychological tests that include questions that help determine the Mac level. The most effective will be people with an average score. If the level is high, it indicates that you are hiring a potential leader who is capable of creating a toxic work environment in the team.

If you are in a managerial role, it is important to recognize that you cannot change such an employee. However, it can be used effectively if you **follow the following rules** .

**1\. Assess the psychological situation in the team**

Machiavellians find it possible to manipulate others if the environment helps. The higher the indicators of satisfaction and involvement in the team, the lower the degree of negative influence of the Machiavellians.

**2\. Set boundaries**

Often, Machiavellians try to expand their zone of influence and take on excessive responsibility. When hiring, you need to clearly state their responsibilities, outline the hierarchy in the company and fix decisions that they may or may not make on their own.

**3\. Use mentoring**

During the trial period, attach experienced mentors to new employees who will help you integrate into the team and guide you into the established corporate culture.

{{<ads>}}

**4\. Have conversations with employees**

In teams where there are people with a high Mac level, a rather active competitive environment arises. Such competition can become excessive when employees forget about their direct responsibilities and try to outplay each other. Hold team and individual meetings to help employees focus on company goals and move away from manipulative strategies.

**5\. Evaluate the result**

To gain your trust, Machiavellians may lie, distort facts, and make promises that will not be kept. It is important to set clear goals for them and monitor their implementation.

**6\. Create a work environment**

Machiavellians can easily ingratiate themselves in order to use these connections for their own purposes. It is important to distinguish between work and personal communication and maintain professional relationships with subordinates.

When a leader takes on a managerial function, the team will focus on him as a strong leader, see the main strategy of the company and not succumb to the influence of individual employees.

How to use Machiavellianism for good
------------------------------------

There are **two forms of Machiavellianism**  - pathological and mature.

**The mature form** speaks of the harmonious development of the psyche, when a person knows how to set goals and realize his potential without having a toxic effect on others. Unfortunately, there are very few such people.

If we talk about the **pathological form** , then it is a consequence of childhood psychological trauma. For example, when a child is brought up by rather rigid parents, or he grows up in an environment where composure is maintained, excessive demands are made and his feelings and desires are not taken into account.

{{<ads>}}

If we consider Machiavellianism from the point of view of achieving the goal, then it does not matter at all whether a person has negative character traits or not. In any case, he will achieve the tasks that he sets for himself and will become a fairly effective employee in the team.

As for humanity, it is quite difficult to be in the same team with a pathological Machiavellian. You need to be careful and not succumb to his manipulations.

If a person realizes that he himself has a fairly large number of Machiavellian traits, then he needs to understand what is the reason. After all, if this is a consequence of childhood psychotrauma, then sooner or later they can lead to depression, problems in relation to others or psychosomatic manifestations. To turn negative moments into pluses, you will have to contact a psychotherapist. Over time, a person will restore contact with himself and become whole. He will have healthy confidence, organization and empathy. He will be able to create large projects that previously lacked the strength. This will bring significant dividends not only to himself, but also to the business for the benefit of which he will work.

**Author:** *Anna Chernigova, Head of the International Academy of Reparative Psychology and Therapy*