---
title: "Love can be measured: how to achieve affection from customers"
description: "The question of how to keep income at the right level is now being asked by all businessmen. The answer seems to be simple: attract more new customers. But it is even more important to keep the existing ones. Pavel Guzhikov (Dengi Vperyod fintech company) on how to do it"
date: 2022-06-15T00:37:53+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-15T00:37:53+08:00
images:
- gVtDXdK.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Pavel Guzhikov
interest: Marketing and Advertising
channel: 
- strategic marketing
- internet marketing
- instructions
tags: 
---

We count loyal customers by their heads
---------------------------------------

A study by the think tank Qualtrics XM Institute "What buyers expect from you in the next year" showed that 60% of people are ready to repeat purchases if they feel that they are appreciated. Four metrics will help you determine how many loyal customers you have.

**1\. Customer Lifetime Value (CLV), or customer lifetime value**

_The amount of revenue that a user of the company will potentially bring over the entire time._

CLV = Avg Sell Price \* Avg Monthly Sales \* Avg Customer Retention

If the performance is below the industry average, it is better to shift the focus from getting attention to keeping it.

**2\. Net Promoter Score (NPS), or consumer loyalty index**

_A metric that determines the attitude of consumers towards your company._

If NPS matters:

*   from 0 to 4 points - the situation is catastrophic: people are dissatisfied with the product and, most likely, complain about it to others;
*   from 4 to 6 points - everything is bad, but the situation can be improved,
*   7-8 points - people use the product, but do not fully enjoy it.

A score of 9-10 points is something to strive for, as it indicates that buyers like everything.

**3\. Customer Retention Rate (CRR), or user retention rate**

_Percentage of customers who used the campaign's services during a given period of time._

CRR = (total number of customers at the end of the period - the number of new customers in the same period) / number of customers at the beginning of the given period

Each company has its own ideal CRR - it depends on how often a customer needs your product, and on how many alternatives the market offers. Generally speaking, 30% is a good indicator for the tenth week. In the first weeks, the CRR should be higher.

If the indicator is approximately the same from time to time, it means that users have already understood that your product is better than analogues, and they use it regularly. This is a clear sign of readiness for growth for most companies.

{{<ads>}}

**4\. Churn rate (CR), or customer churn rate**

_The number of users who stop any interaction with your company._

CR = Lost Clients / Total Clients

CR is usually counted on the first, third, seventh and 21st day or weekly. If users “fall off” immediately after registration, then the problem most likely lies in the process itself or onboarding that is not fully understood. It happens that they refuse your product, for example, after six or seven months and even after two years. Then the reasons, most likely, are personal (moving to another city, changing priorities and desires) or product changes were not as successful as planned. On average, 3-5% is a pretty good CRR.

Seven Steps to the Perfect Customer Relationship
------------------------------------------------

In a highly competitive market, you can’t expect a person to “fall in love” with your product just because of its quality. Here is the bare minimum to keep a customer.

**1\. Segment your target audience.**

The more detailed you can segment the audience, the better you will be able to build communication with it. However, too fine crushing is meaningless - there is a risk of getting a small exhaust at high costs.

With each segment, you need to build a personalized communication. For example, a customer bought pills from an online pharmacy or a pharmacy that has an online store. The pharmacy knows that the drug is designed for 30 days and is usually required for long-term use. Therefore, on the 21st day of use, it may remind you to buy a new one.

**2\. Perform an RFM analysis.**

RFM analysis is based on key indicators of user behavior: the date of the last purchase, the frequency of purchases, and the total amount of all purchases. Based on these indicators, segments are formed - for example, those who buy your goods often and for large amounts, those who buy rarely and for small amounts, etc. For example, you can offer unique conditions to users from the first group in order to add value to your offer, and conduct CustDev with users from the second group to understand the reasons for rare interaction and build a communication strategy based on the answers.

**3\. Work on a "Customer Journey Map" (CJM).**

If you work with clients directly, then you will have only one “user journey map”, if through partners, then several, since the entry points will be different. For example, we have several b2c user entry points - directly; through the Alfa-Bank application and the Avito Rabota service.

*   Direct customers are employees of those companies that have connected to the service. We interact with them through internal department heads and HR specialists.
*   In the case of Alfa-Bank, we are most often talking about the already existing clients of the bank, to whom, under the terms of scoring, we can offer an additional product.
*   Through Avito Rabota, new users who still do not know anything about our products can come to us, they need to conduct onboarding. After a client interacts with a company for the first time, we guide them through the funnel and monitor the reaction at each stage. The path may begin with registration or purchase - here we can see a large proportion of abandoned carts or, conversely, registrations. For us, this is a signal that something seems uncomfortable to the user or that he does not understand something. Therefore, it is important to ask him for reasons or offer a bonus. If the user has already become our client, we monitor behavioral metrics: when he was on the site for the last time, how often he visits it, what sections he looks at. Based on this data, we build trigger mechanics that will return customers to us. For example, if the user has not been on the site for more than 30 days, it is important to remind yourself and give a relevant purchase recommendation. For a visual display of CJM, the Miro service is well suited.

{{<ads>}}

**4\. Personalize communication.**

Think over a system of discounts, loyalty programs, implement a chat bot.

**5\. Launch referral programs.**

Referral programs work well in b2c. One of the most striking examples of referral programs in b2c is Tinkoff Bank, which offers a reward for each client you bring. In b2b, the mechanics work worse, since the deal cycle here can range from a week to a year. If your clients are companies, it is better to use a bonus system for employees.

**6\. Provide prompt customer support.**

If a person can use your product at any time of the day, then it is worth creating a round-the-clock call center. However, maintaining it is not cheap. Support in Telegram or VKontakte can become an analogue.

**7\. Track relevant user reviews and comments on social media.**

Monitor the information field using specialized services, such as YouScan or Medialogy. A negative review rate above 8-10% should give you pause. However, the critical level differs for companies at different stages. For startups, at first, the indicator may be higher, as the audience is only getting used to the product; in stable companies, it is likely to be below this bar. In our country, for example, it is now equal to 1%.

**Author:** *Pavel Guzhikov, founder of the fintech company Dengi Vperyod*