---
title: "How the Chinese stock market works and why it is not growing: a complete guide"
description: China over the past decades has surpassed the major developed economies in economic growth and created its own stock market. But China's stocks do not reflect the economic success of the country, as it happens in the US. We understand how the Chinese market works and what is its problem
date: 2022-06-11T17:35:45+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T17:35:45+08:00
images:
- HB3RuWp.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- Karina Karimova
interest: Investments
channel: 
- shares
tags: 
---

The Chinese stock market is young compared to the markets of developed countries. The culture of organized trading was brought to the region by the West - Americans and Europeans. The country's oldest trading floor, the Shanghai Stock Exchange, was formed by residents of the Shanghai International Settlement, an area that was under international administration from 1842 to 1943.

It was [created](https://bizfluent.com/about-5070399-history-chinas-stock-market.html) in 1842 under the terms of the Treaty of Nanjing - following the results of the First Opium War, in which the Chinese side lost. Foreign capital came to the territory of the Shanghai International Settlement, and in the late 1860s, securities trading began here. In June 1866, the first list of shares appeared, which prompted the then entrepreneurs to create banks and joint-stock companies.

In the late 1880s, China's mining industry was a strong driver of the region's economy. In 1891, [the](https://www.goldmansachs.com/our-firm/history/moments/1990-shanghai-stock-exchange-reopens.html) Shanghai Association of Stock Brokers was founded. This organization created the first stock exchange in China. Most of the shares on it were provided by local companies. In 1904, the association created another stock exchange in Hong Kong, expanding the influence of the Chinese market on the world economy. The association itself was renamed the Shanghai Stock Exchange.

In 1928, the new Shanghai Stock Exchange appeared, structurally consisting of several trading organizations.

The Shanghai Stock Exchange was the largest stock market in Asia until the 1949 revolution, when the communist regime was established in China. It was integrated with the New York Stock Exchange, and in 1937 transactions between the two cities were completed in 16 minutes thanks to radio communications. The Shanghai Stock Exchange suspended all operations on December 8, 1941, when the Japanese took control of Shanghai. The exchange resumed operations in 1946, and then was liquidated by November 1950.

{{<ads>}}

The restoration of the work of the Chinese stock exchange and communication with the international financial system occurred during the period of Deng Xiaoping's power, who managed to carry out a number of economic reforms.

In the 1980s, the issuance and trading of securities in China resumed.

In August 1986, the People's Bank of China [opened](https://bizfluent.com/about-5070399-history-chinas-stock-market.html) over-the-counter markets in Shanghai and Shenyang. Then there were markets in Beijing, Wuhan and Guangzhou. In April 1988, the Chinese government allowed open trading of government debt. In Shanghai, money trading was opened, as well as the resale of government bonds for cash.

In 1990, the People's Bank of China announced the creation of two national stock exchanges - in Shanghai and Shenzhen. This made the PRC the second socialist country with its own stock exchange after Hungary.

Hong Kong Stock Exchange
------------------------

The first [reports](https://www.hkexgroup.com/About-HKEX/About-HKEX/History-of-HKEX-and-its-Market? sc_lang=en) of securities trading in Hong Kong date back to the middle of the 19th century. However, the first official market, the Hong Kong Stock Brokers Association, appeared in 1891. In 1914, the association was renamed the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.

{{<ads>}}

In 1921, a second exchange appeared here - the Hong Kong Association of Stock Brokers. In 1947, the two trading floors merged into one Hong Kong stock exchange and contributed to the recovery of the stock market after the Second World War.

The rapid growth of the Hong Kong economy led to the emergence of three more exchanges in the region - the Far East Exchange in 1969, the Cam Ngan Stock Exchange in 1971 and the Kowloon Stock Exchange in 1972.

In 1980, the four exchanges were merged into one Hong Kong Stock Exchange. On April 2, 1986, the exchange began to use computer algorithms in trading. Until 2000, there were 570 participating organizations on the exchange.

As a result of the market reform in 1999–2000, a holding company HKEX Group emerged, which included the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, the Hong Kong Futures Exchange and the Hong Kong Clearing Company.

Unlike other Chinese exchanges, Hong Kong is a private commercial enterprise, less dependent on the Chinese authorities.

The specifics of Chinese exchanges
----------------------------------

In China, prices are rising in [red](https://supchina.com/2021/03/08/a-brief-guide-to-chinas-stock-markets-and-indices/) and falling in green. In Chinese culture, red is considered a symbol of success and wealth. Instead of letters, numbers are used here as tickers. The Chinese authorities tightly regulate the market, regularly introducing additional restrictions on businesses.

{{<ads>}}

There are several types of shares in the Chinese market, there are differences in the rules for citizens of the country and non-residents.

**Type A shares**

[Mainland Chinese yuan- denominated](https://am.jpmorgan.com/content/dam/jpm-am-aem/global/en/insights/market-insights/guide-to-china.pdf) shares traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen trading floors. Since 2001, this market has been opened to non-residents - at first, institutional investors were allowed to buy these shares under a license within quotas, and later foreigners were allowed to trade A shares on the Shanghai Stock Exchange through Hong Kong brokers.

**Type B shares**

Shares of companies in mainland China. Traded in Hong Kong dollars on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange and in US dollars on the Shanghai Stock Exchange. There are no restrictions on trading for different categories of investors, but they were originally intended for foreigners, and since 2001 Chinese citizens have also gained access to them.

**Type H shares**

Hong Kong dollar-denominated shares of Mainland Chinese companies listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. There are no restrictions for different categories of investors.

**red chips**

Securities of state-owned companies registered outside of mainland China are [denominated](https://am.jpmorgan.com/content/dam/jpm-am-aem/global/en/insights/market-insights/guide-to-china.pdf) in Hong Kong dollars and are listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. Available to all investors.

**P chips**

Securities of non-state companies registered outside mainland China, [denominated](https://am.jpmorgan.com/content/dam/jpm-am-aem/global/en/insights/market-insights/guide-to-china.pdf) in Hong Kong dollars, listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. Available to all investors.

**Securities of foreign sites: stocks of type N and S**

Securities (including ADRs) listed on foreign exchanges. For NASDAQ and NYSE securities, these are N-shares, for the Singapore Stock Exchange - S-shares.

According [to](https://am.jpmorgan.com/content/dam/jpm-am-aem/global/en/insights/market-insights/guide-to-china.pdf) JP Morgan, for 2022, China has the most type A shares - by $2.1 trillion, less - P-chips, their volume is $969 billion, even less in the market of type H shares - by $478 billion. Papers remain the least represented. foreign exchanges — $213 billion, red chips — $121 billion, and very few type B shares in China — $4 billion.

Despite the fact that in their modern form, the two main Chinese stock exchanges - Shanghai and Shenzhen - have been operating for only three decades, during this time they have made a huge leap [forward](https://www.tradinghours.com/markets) , competing with the stock markets of strong capitalist countries. Now Chinese exchanges are among the six largest stock exchanges in the world in terms of capitalization, along with the American and Japanese stock exchanges.

{{<info>}}
**shanghai stock exchange**

*   Capitalization: $6.64 trillion
*   Number of listed companies: 2093.
*   Indices: SSE Composite - reflects the state of all companies of the site, SSE 50 - reflects the state of 50 blue chips of the exchange.

**Shenzhen Stock Exchange**

*   Market cap: $4.54 trillion
*   Number of registered companies: 2638.
*   Indices: the main one is the SZSE Component Index (an index based on 500 listed companies).

**Hong Kong Stock Exchange**

*   Market [cap](https://www.hkex.com.hk/Market-Data/Statistics/Consolidated-Reports/Securities-Statistics-Archive/Market_capitalisation? sc_lang=en#select1=0) : $4.8 trillion
*   Number of [registered](https://www.hkex.com.hk/Mutual-Market/Stock-Connect/Statistics/Hong-Kong-and-Mainland-Market-Highlights? sc_lang=en#select3=0&select2=5&select1=6) companies: 2217.
*   Indices: Hang Seng is an index of blue chips traded on the stock exchange.
{{</info>}}

{{<ads>}}

**Also important Chinese indices:**

*   **CSI 300**  is a capitalization-weighted index that reproduces the dynamics of the shares of the 300 largest companies traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges;
*   **MSCI China** - the index reflects the dynamics of the shares of Chinese companies of large and mid-cap, represented by H-stocks, B-stocks, red chips and P-chips. Based on 140 components, this index covers approximately 85% of investment in Chinese stocks.

There are many state [\-owned companies](https://am.jpmorgan.com/content/dam/jpm-am-aem/global/en/insights/market-insights/guide-to-china.pdf) in the Chinese market. Among the companies represented in the CSI 300 Index, sectors such as communication services, energy, and utilities are 100% occupied by state-owned public enterprises. 88% of them occupy the financial sector, 84% - real estate. Similar ratios are in the offshore Hang Seng Index.

The most profitable in terms of "earnings per share" in 2022 were Chinese companies from the utility sector, in second place - tech, in third - manufacturers of essential goods. In 2023, according to JP Morgan, the shares of the healthcare segment, manufacturers of secondary demand and essential goods will be the most profitable.

China's economy is growing, but stocks are not
----------------------------------------------

In three decades, China has made remarkable economic progress. If in 1993 the country was in fifth place in terms of GDP, and the United States, Japan, Germany and Great Britain were ahead, then in 2020 China came close to the United States and [was](https://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/219908/china-stocks-the-road-to-nowhere.aspx) in second place in this indicator. Over the past 20 years, the US [has increased](https://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/219908/china-stocks-the-road-to-nowhere.aspx) its gross domestic product per capita by 20% and China by 400%.

Given the massive growth of the economy, the country's stock market should have [skyrocketed](https://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/219908/china-stocks-the-road-to-nowhere.aspx) , as company profits rise along with the acceleration of economic growth in general. For example, from 1993 to 2020, US GDP increased by 85%. During this time, pre-tax corporate profits of businesses rose from $2 trillion to $8.7 trillion. Even taking into account inflation, the growth of corporate income is 145%, which is much higher than the growth rate of the economy. For every dollar of GDP growth, American companies generated $1.7 in pre-tax profits.

{{<ads>}}

It would seem, drawing an analogy with the Chinese economy, the local market should have skyrocketed during this time. And in the late 1990s, Wall Street analysts [thought](https://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/219908/china-stocks-the-road-to-nowhere.aspx) so , predicting strong growth in the Chinese market. However, in reality, everything happened quite the opposite: Chinese stocks not only did not overtake other markets, but also lagged far behind them.

The nominal yield of the Chinese market for the period from 1993 to 2020 [showed an](https://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/219908/china-stocks-the-road-to-nowhere.aspx) increase of 1.5%, but when adjusted for inflation, it completely disappears. In real terms, Chinese stocks not only didn't budge, they fell 1.8 percentage points a year. According to Morningstar analyst and columnist John [Rekenthaler](https://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/219908/china-stocks-the-road-to-nowhere.aspx), it is difficult to assess the Chinese market due to the restrictions of the authorities, and other indices show that Chinese stocks have grown during this time (for example, S & P / IFCI - by 4.73%). But that doesn't matter, given that despite the country's unprecedented economic boom, Chinese equities have not risen relative to the economy.

The growth they've shown since the 2008 economic crisis has been offset by attacks from President Xi Jinping and problems in the real estate sector caused by a debt-ridden major developer linked to the party. Despite the growth of the Chinese market over 20 years, given the high volatility of Chinese stocks, their risk/return ratio looks less attractive compared to securities in other countries.

All this seems paradoxical: after all, Chinese companies are among the fastest growing, while American businesses fail to be as profitable as Chinese ones.

{{<ads>}}

The reason for such a weak result of the Chinese stock market is the organization of the shareholder structure. As [Fukxu](https://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/220069/chinese-stocks-what-went-wrong.aspx) Jiang and Kenneth Kim point out in their research paper, the shares of companies are usually distributed in the hands of very large owners. In 2018, more than 80% of listed Chinese companies had shareholders who owned at least 20% of the shares of the business.

Such investors, the researchers write, often use their powers to "expropriate funds from minority shareholders." For example, they may be involved in transactions that promote the development of their other activities by influencing a company in which they are the largest shareholders.

The problem is that in addition to the fact that there are many state-owned companies on the stock exchange, there are also those that are considered independent of the authorities, but are actually associated with the party. Jiang and Kim [report](https://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/220069/chinese-stocks-what-went-wrong.aspx) that in a 2007 study, 27% of Chinese businesses classified as non-governmental were run by former officials. Such companies may be pressured by the authorities in accordance with their needs, and not the real state of the business.

Another disadvantage of the Chinese market is the lack of legal protection for business at the proper level, although regulatory rules have improved relatively over the past decades, Jiang and Kim note.

**Author:** *Karina Karimova*
