---
title: "Bankrupt Ceylon: how Sri Lanka went from prosperity to default"
description: From a prosperous country and a paradise for tourists, Sri Lanka has become a troubled region, forced to default. Bloomberg and Financial Times explain the causes of the crisis and name the next default candidates among developing countries
date: 2022-06-11T16:58:04+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-11T16:58:04+08:00
images:
- LrH5cpm.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Danurwendho Adyakusuma / Unsplash'
authors:
- Kira Galkina
interest: Investments
channel: 
- economic trends
tags: 
---

Hundreds of people stand for hours under the scorching sun in the hope of getting kerosene, which is needed for cooking and lighting during long periods of power outages. This is how the people of Sri Lanka line up for kilometers at gas stations.

There is no kerosene at gas stations, and it is not clear when it will appear. In May, the country defaulted for the first time in history. Sri Lanka is now suffering from food and medical shortages, and hospitals are postponing surgeries. The UN estimates that almost half of the island's inhabitants are at risk of falling below the poverty line.

In April 2022, the country experienced the highest inflation in Asia at around 30%. In May 2022, Sri Lanka defaulted amid a worsening economic and political crisis. It became the first country in the Asia-Pacific region in 20 years that was unable to service external government debt obligations. Sri Lanka's gold and foreign exchange reserves were reduced to almost zero, the country [was](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/16/sri-lanka-financial-crisis-new-prime-minister-ranil-wickremesinghe) on the verge of bankruptcy.

Until recently, Sri Lanka seemed to be a thriving region, it was a paradise for tourists, as well as a favorite destination for freelancers and surfers. The standard of living on the island remained one of the highest in South Asia. The per capita income of the Sri Lankans was twice [that](https://www.ft.com/content/14cf5157-b798-44b6-a2dd-6c5a2ff011a0) of neighboring India, life expectancy was growing, writes the Financial Times.

Now those gains are under threat as deep economic and social imbalances lurk behind growth. At the same time, Sri Lanka may turn out to be only the first sign, and several more states may be waiting for a default.

{{<ads>}}

Growing signs point to a crisis that analysts at the consulting firm Eurasia Group say is turning Sri Lanka, with a population of 22 million, into a failed state. The government of President Gotabaya Rajapaksa says the country is nearly out of foreign exchange reserves and fuel. The state relies on one-time supplies to replenish stocks.

As the country's debt crisis began to escalate into a humanitarian emergency, Sri Lanka was forced to ask for help with food from its neighbors. The government has already approached a food bank run by the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). It supplied rice and other staple foods to member states during crises.

Fat years
---------

In 2009, after the end of a devastating 26-year civil war, the economy of Sri Lanka began a period of rapid development, tourists rushed to the island. In the same year, the travel portal Lonely Planet recognized the country as the world's best tourist destination.

Under governments ruled by the Rajapaksa family, annual economic growth reached 9%. At the same time, the life expectancy of the population grew due to the development of health care and education systems.

Sri Lanka has become a key Asian bond issuer and a participant in the Chinese One Belt, One Road project (involves the creation of transport corridors between the countries of the Asia-Pacific region, primarily China, and Western Europe and the corresponding infrastructure). The country attracted international creditors to restore it (this became a big problem later).

However, economic mismanagement undermined the prosperity of the island. Back in 2009, the Sri Lankan authorities focused more on the supply of goods to the domestic market, not trying to enter the foreign market. Thus, export earnings remained low while import bills continued to rise. The huge debt of the country led to a balance of payments crisis in 2016, and debts to China grew.

Political crises were a painful blow to the economy (the government of President Maithripala Sirisena showed its inefficiency in resolving the debt crisis and complete political instability) and a series of terrorist attacks that scared away tourists.

On Easter morning, April 21, 2019, eight explosions hit close to churches and hotels, killing hundreds and injuring hundreds more.  
This hit the tourism industry hard - according to statistics, in 2009, 538 thousand tourists visited the island, by 2019 their number had grown to 2 million, and in 2020 it had collapsed to 540 thousand.

{{<ads>}}

Causes of the crisis
--------------------

As a result of political crises and terrorist attacks, the economy of Sri Lanka was in a deplorable state by the time Gotabaya Rajapaksa became president. GDP has grown at the slowest pace since 2001.

“The economy of Sri Lanka was built on unsustainable debt. They spent more than they received,” points out UN Resident Coordinator Hanaa Singer-Hamdi in Colombo, the de facto capital of Sri Lanka, where the government and presidential residence are located. The Rajapaksa government has financed nearly everything from roads and airports to Port City, an ambitious project to turn reclaimed land in Colombo into a financial hub, with borrowed funds.

According to the analytical center Advocata Institute, the total amount of Chinese loans to Sri Lanka is about $3.5 billion, and they turned out to be the most problematic. Despite the fact that the republic owes more to private bondholders and countries such as Japan, Chinese loans under the One Belt, One Road program were provided at high interest rates. The money went to infrastructure projects that were often not profitable (one of the ports was eventually leased to Beijing for 99 years).

Corruption also played a role. According to Harini Amarasuriya, an MP from the left-wing Janatha Vimukti Peramuna party (one of the largest in Sri Lanka), over the past 25-30 years, economic decisions have been made mainly on the basis of "kickbacks and commissions." According to a January poll by think tank Verité Research, only 10% of Sri Lankans approve of the government.

Another factor was the decisions of President Gotabaya Rajapaksa, which, according to some analysts, led the island to a crisis, writes The Financial Times. The head of state drastically cut taxes (followed by a decrease in government revenue) and changed the constitution to keep power in the hands of his family. It also introduced a brief but disruptive ban on chemical fertilizers in 2021. This measure was supposed to help the development of organic farming and save money on imports, but led to a sharp drop in yields. According to UN estimates, rice imports to Sri Lanka, which was previously self-sufficient, increased by 368% because of this.

{{<ads>}}

Since 2019, the country's credit rating has been steadily falling. This resulted in Sri Lanka being excluded from international debt markets. The state has lost the ability to refinance loans.

The COVID-19 pandemic, in turn, hit the tourism industry in Sri Lanka. Foreign exchange inflows have fallen sharply and import bills have risen due to rising commodity prices.

The Central Bank of Sri Lanka refused to devalue the currency amid high inflation, using gold reserves instead. The circulation of dollars decreased, this made it difficult to import goods, and as a result, there was a shortage of diesel fuel and domestic gas, many small businesses stopped working.

The situation in Sri Lanka has also become a prime example of the economic and political crisis that developing countries around the world are facing due to rising inflation and Moscow's military operation on the territory of Ukraine, writes The Financial Times. The republic is dependent on imported energy and staple foods such as wheat. The military operation also hit Sri Lankan tourism - Russia and Ukraine were the country's first and third largest tourism markets in early 2022, respectively.

Disappointing prospects
-----------------------

In mid-May 2022, the new Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, Ranil Wickramasinghe (at the same time head of the country's Ministry of Finance), warned that the financial crisis that gripped the country would worsen and "the next few months will be the most difficult in life." “In November 2019, our foreign exchange reserves amounted to $7.5 billion. However, today it is not easy for the Treasury to find $1 million,” he [said](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/16/sri-lanka-financial-crisis-new-prime-minister-ranil-wickremesinghe).

Wickramasinghe also said the country was "out of gas" and that although there are fuel ships in Colombo's harbor, the government cannot afford to pay for them. According to him, stocks of 14 essential medicines are running out on the island. The Sri Lankan Central Bank predicts that inflation [will reach](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-25/sri-lanka-pm-set-to-be-named-finance-minister-to-lead-debt-talks?utm_source=google&utm_medium=bd&cmpId=google) 40% in the next few months.

According to JPMorgan analysts, Sri Lanka's total debt obligations will be $7 billion in 2022, and the current account deficit will be $3 billion.

The country has already begun negotiations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on the allocation of financial assistance in the amount of up to $4 billion and is preparing negotiations with creditors on debt restructuring (they are being led by Wickramasinghe).

{{<ads>}}

The external debt was defaulted for an interim period pending the restructuring of these obligations under the IMF-supported economic adjustment program.

“Our position is very clear. Until they \[creditors\] come and restructure, we will not be able to pay, ” Nandalal Weerasinghe, the head of the Sri Lankan Central Bank , [said in mid-May 2022.](https://www.bbc.com/news/business-61505842)

The World Bank, for its part, does not plan to offer new financing to Sri Lanka "until an adequate macroeconomic policy framework is in place." The organization is currently reallocating resources from previously approved projects to help the government with some essential medicines, temporary cash transfers for poor and vulnerable households, and support for farmers and small businesses.

At the end of May 2022, Sri Lankan Prime Minister Wikramasinghe announced an overdue debt to a Chinese bank in the amount of $105 million, which was not mentioned earlier. According to Lakshini Fernando, senior vice president and economist at investment firm Asia Securities, this means that Sri Lanka has actually defaulted on $183 million, and not $78 million, as previously thought. She believes that in the short term the situation in the country will only get worse, especially for residents who receive daily wages and are most vulnerable to inflationary pressures.

“The only way to reassure the entire population is to ensure the availability of gasoline, to cope with the shortage of food. But this will not happen soon, ” Fernando [warned](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-05-22/sri-lanka-is-drowning-in-a-sea-of-debt-and-other-economies-face-the-same-fate) at the end of May.

Sri Lanka can still “rise from the ashes” and restore the confidence of global investors if it plays its cards right, writes GlobalCapital. There are many factors that speak in favor of a successful exit from the crisis. Thus, the offshore bond debt of $12.6 billion is relatively small (about 15% of the gross domestic product of about $83 billion). If the South Asian country continues to keep its doors open to investors (on January 18, 2022, Sri Lanka redeemed its $500 million worth of bonds at 5.75% before saying it would stop meeting its debt obligations amid a liquidity crunch), it could keep their faith in a difficult period.

Debt restructuring could make international capital markets unavailable to Sri Lanka for several years. But, if the country manages to successfully survive the restructuring, systematically solving its problems, including domestic political ones, it will ensure a confident return to the markets.

Who is next
-----------

Sri Lanka's default could have significant geopolitical implications. The country has long been a point of rivalry between countries such as India and China (the reason is the island's strategic location in the Indian Ocean). Both states combined different approaches - concessional lending and diplomatic pressure - to protect their interests on the island. Now there is a question of restructuring. China has so far rejected Sri Lankan requests to restructure outstanding debts. India, on the contrary, sought to strengthen its dominance on the island. It has offered a range of credit lines, debt swaps and other relief measures, which New Delhi says is valued at about $3.5 billion.

The lack of food and fuel has affected not only Sri Lanka, many states around the world are at risk, writes The Telegraph. The reason for concern was the closure of the Black Sea ports, which Ukraine uses to export grain.

The Guardian also writes that Sri Lanka could be just "the first domino to fall in the face of the global debt crisis". Many "low- and middle-income countries" are struggling with the same "triangular crisis" that is affecting Sri Lanka, namely the "pandemic, rising cost of their debt and rising food and fuel prices" after the start of the Russian military operation on the territory of Ukraine . The UN estimates that a total of 69 countries have experienced all three shocks — 25 in Africa, 25 in Asia and the Pacific, and 19 in Latin America and the Pacific.

{{<ads>}}

According to the World Bank, the threat of an economic crisis looms over more than a dozen states. It will be the largest wave of debt crises in developing countries in the last generation, bank analysts [point out.](https://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/are-we-ready-coming-spate-debt-crises)

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is negotiating emergency loans with Egypt, Tunisia and Pakistan. Cairo has already "received billions of dollars in financial support from several Gulf Arab states" and expects to reach an agreement with the IMF "within months," [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/) [reported](https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/egypt-expects-reach-agreement-with-imf-within-months-2022-05-15/).[](http://www.reuters.com/)

Pakistan is on the brink of default, "trying for months to keep the economy afloat" amid a deepening political crisis. There is a high probability that one of the most populous countries in the world may soon follow Sri Lanka and, if the IMF does not help, will default for the second time in its history, [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) [notes](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-24/default-threat-reaches-pakistan-in-deepening-political-crisis).Burkina Faso, Mali and Chad are "close to the brink" according to analysts. The financial stability in such states as Kenya, Ethiopia and South Africa causes concern. The IMF pays attention to those countries that [were](https://www.theweek.co.uk/news/world-news/956883/countries-that-could-follow-sri-lanka-economic-chaos) under attack in Latin America.

The most vulnerable in the fund [consider](https://blogs.imf.org/2022/04/26/latin-america-faces-unusually-high-risks/#) Argentina and El Salvador.

“Sri Lanka's default is an ominous sign for emerging markets,” said Guido Chamorro, co-head of emerging markets foreign exchange debt at Pictet Asset Management. The firm holds Sri Lankan bonds. We expect the good times to end. A slowdown in economic growth and more difficult financing conditions will increase the risk of default, especially for border countries.”

_Sources: The Financial Times, The Week, The Telegraph, The Guardian, [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/) , [Bloomberg](http://www.bloomberg.com/) , BBC, Time._

**Author:** *Kira Galkina*