---
title: "There is an energy crisis in Europe. How dangerous is it for the economy?"
description: Oil and gas prices in Europe are skyrocketing. As a result, consumer goods are also becoming more expensive. The Economist analyzes whether such a situation will lead to a recession in the region, and explains which countries are relatively safe.
date: 2022-06-12T16:48:29+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T16:48:29+08:00
images:
- 0G4l6BA.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Robert Thiemann / Unsplash'
authors:
- Nikita Glazkov
interest: Investments
channel: 
- economic trends
tags: 
---

For almost a decade, low interest rates seemed to be something unshakable in the eurozone, as well as low inflation. Now the growth rate of consumer prices exceeds 8% per annum, while the target of the European Central Bank is 2%. The board of directors of the regulator promised an early increase in rates. However, the ECB is in a difficult position, as it needs to contend not only with the rapid rise in prices, requiring a rapid increase in the key rate, but also with a possible slowdown in economic growth, dictating the need for more moderate policy.

The main reason for both phenomena is the price shock - a sharp increase in the cost of energy. Oil and gas prices were rising even before the events in Ukraine, and with their beginning they soared up even more. In Europe, the impact of this factor on consumer price inflation was more significant than in the US, where stimulus payments to the population also played an important role. According to Goldman Sachs, the rise in energy prices in the Eurozone (whose rate reached 39% per annum in May) provided about four percentage points of inflation, while in the US - two.

Accordingly, this led to higher prices for other consumer goods. In May, the rise in core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) in the euro area exceeded economists' expectations. Selling prices for German manufacturers rose by a record 33.5% yoy in April, driven by rising costs not only for fuels, but also for energy-intensive semi-finished products such as metals, concrete and chemicals. This led to an increase in the costs of enterprises and a decrease in the purchasing power of households. The question is how dangerous this is for the eurozone economy.

One of the consequences of the energy shock is a decrease in household income in real terms. The pace of wage growth across the euro area has picked up somewhat, although it is still lagging behind inflation. Some employers provide lump sum payments to employees to somehow compensate for rising prices, without resorting to higher salaries received on an ongoing basis. Thus, in the Netherlands, for example, the growth of wages in May amounted to only 2.8%, even taking into account the tension in the labor market. In a sense, this is good news for the ECB, because the risks of an inflationary spiral are reduced due to the mutual influence of rising prices and wages on each other. However, the downside of this could be lower consumption and a weaker economy.

{{<ads>}}

The decline in demand could exacerbate the problems of the manufacturing sector, where the level of entrepreneurial confidence has already fallen sharply. The resumption of supply disruptions as a result of recent lockdowns in China and rising fuel prices are hurting manufacturing, with Germany and Eastern Europe likely to be hardest hit. The volume of new orders for producers in the euro area fell in May for the first time since June 2020, which indicates a decrease in demand. The decline in export orders has also been the strongest over the past two years.

Therefore, economists predict a slowdown in growth rates until the end of the year. However, while few people expect a real recession. Largely because individual industries faced an energy crisis, being in a relatively favorable position. Many companies are still experiencing positive effects from the lifting of quarantine restrictions and the recovery of the economy after the coronavirus. Countries located in the south of Europe benefit from a developed tourism industry. In Spain, the influx of tourists from the northern countries, yearning for the sun, reached almost pre-pandemic levels already in April. In general, entrepreneurial confidence in the service sector remains at a fairly high level, and companies say that they do not even have time to process all orders.

There are still many jobs. In the first quarter of 2022, there were three vacancies in the eurozone for every 100 jobs: a high figure by historical standards. The companies are not very worried about the future prospects for hiring, although perhaps a little more than before the start of the Ukrainian events. One in four (or more) businesses in Europe say that a lack of staff is preventing them from expanding production.

Savings accumulated during the quarantine will provide consumers with some protection from the energy shock. In the first quarter of 2022 in France and Germany, such “surplus” funds accounted for about a tenth of household disposable income, according to The Economist.

{{<ads>}}

These funds will dampen the impact of the sharp rise in energy prices. But they don't fully compensate. First, savings are unevenly distributed. The poorest people in rich countries and most households in poor countries have very few left. In Slovakia, for example, the savings rate barely increased during the pandemic and is now well below the long-term average. "Low-income households will play a major role in weakening demand," said Morgan Stanley's Jens Eisenschmidt. Indeed, retail sales in real terms have been in a sideways trend for several months now.

Many governments go to great lengths to protect their citizens from high energy prices. According to the analytical center Bruegel, Germany, France, Italy and other countries spend from 1 to 2% of GDP for these purposes. However, not all funds go where they are most needed. Most of them go to help wealthy households that do not need it; and pricing interventions result in some funds being deposited with energy suppliers.

Even if there is no recession in the eurozone, the energy crisis will lead to a slowdown in economic growth. The ECB is now faced with an unenviable dilemma. And the more inflation rises due to rising food and energy prices, the more difficult it will be for the European economy.

**Author:** *Nikita Glazkov*
