---
title: "Clash of clans: how envy between colleagues destroys companies from the inside"
description: Most companies do not have a clear employee development plan. The result is a “culture of natural selection” where people fight for career advancement by any means necessary. The struggle escalates into battles between departments and paralyzes work
date: 2022-06-12T11:27:57+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T11:27:57+08:00
images:
- RezxF7i.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Shutterstock'
authors:
- Daria Salnikova
interest: management
channel: 
- team management
tags: 
---


The director of an electrical equipment manufacturer could not decide which of the two managers to appoint as head of the business unit. As a result, he came up with an interesting way: he divided the department and its area of ​​work into two parts, each of the candidates headed his own half. The manager who achieves the best results in half a year will lead the newly united structure, the director proclaimed. The managers happily agreed. As a result, the first one ended up in the hospital with a nervous breakdown, and the second quit after everything he had experienced, says Yulia Podoksenova, director of Ancor Consulting.

It is generally accepted that internal competition is beneficial: it keeps employees in good shape and increases productivity. The reward may be preferences in the company, a new status, access to additional resources. But the inept or inappropriate use of this tool harms team relationships and the overall result. “Competition is almost always a story about the rigidity and objectification of employees. People quickly get tired of such an attitude and leave, ”Podoksenova warns. We found out why companies launch fatal “socialist competitions” inside themselves.

Undercover wars
---------------

Companies are doomed to unhealthy competition between employees by their very nature. To succeed, they need to hire ambitious people, but ambition often hides the personal goals of their owner, who is more interested in promotion than the overall goals of the company. The age-old way to grow in an organization is to downplay the achievements of colleagues and prevent them from achieving their intended results. In a study by the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University (USA), executives were asked to evaluate whether they were ready to use several proposed business ideas. One group was told that the ideas came from employees of their company, the other group that they were borrowed from competitors. Leaders from the first group were much more likely to reject the proposed ideas. After asking them about the reason, the researchers found that the managers thought they could [lose](https://hbr.org/2010/04/envy-at-work) their status if they give way to the successful ideas of colleagues.

{{<ads>}}

An employee seeking career advancement often brings discord and confusion in order to look more advantageous against the background of other specialists who have disgraced themselves against their will, explains Ekaterina Vedyanova, recruitment manager at Aprel Group of Companies (pharmacy chains Pharmacy warehouse and April ). Or, on the contrary, “bring the problem into the house” and heroically solve it so that the leader notices the contribution. “Envy is the sister of competition. Competent employees with ambitions, specialists who honestly perform their work, diligent and strict in their work, try to prove to the manager that they are much smarter, cooler and actually deserve more. Envy begins to eat them up that they have not achieved much in life, and they only manage to be hired workers. Not wanting to intentionally harm, they begin to intrigue on a subconscious level,

In many companies, the struggle between managers develops into an undercover battle of entire departments. “One of my clients led a successful project - sports days within the company. The project took off the first time thanks to the joint efforts of the HR department and him personally. The following year, a successful project decided to take the PR department under its wing - they say, it is more convenient for them. At the same time, the HR director was replaced - and the new HR immediately severely fired the employee who became "unnecessary". As for the PR department, they successfully leaked the project, citing a lack of resources. And my client experienced a dismissal for a long time and could not look for a job, ”career consultant Natalia Kretova gives a sad example. Clan struggle is well known to world-famous corporations such as Walmart and General Motors: it has repeatedly [led](https://pro.rbc.ru/demo/5dcec54b9a7947dd804a1a5c)to the departure of top managers from these companies.

{{<ads>}}

Free exposure
-------------

In teams consisting mainly of young people, jealousy and envy are more pronounced, says Tatyana Evdina, a business coach and head of a large financial company. On the one hand, simply because young people express their reactions more openly and honestly. On the other hand, because, unlike many mature employees, he still believes that intrigues can lead to career success. “Anna and Nikolai were project managers in my subordination, both excellent specialists, both were loved by clients and partners,” Evdina recalls an example from her practice. “But they hated each other so much that they began to redirect their talents and energy from solving design problems to destroying the enemy. Colleagues were also drawn into the conflict. It came to constant complaints about each other, gloating, squabbles at meetings and even dirty tricks on the sly. Consequently,

So that the whole team would not suffer from this war, the simplest solution was to fire one of the rivals, or even both. “But I asked myself two questions: what are they trying to 'shout' at me? Maybe it was just important for Anna to demonstrate her uniqueness to me and win my attention, and for Nikolai to get resources and support from me? As a result, we held several joint meetings where we set boundaries. I said that as a leader I see strength and value in both disputants, I made it clear that these are different qualities, so there is no point in jealousy and rivalry. We agreed that everyone would receive a bonus for helping the other.” The managers did not become friends, but the long conflict faded away in a couple of months and everyone returned to normal business communication, Evdina concluded.

Often the desire for unproductive competition with colleagues eats up the employee himself - it is the result of unconscious psychological problems and is not directed towards the rational goal of promotion. “One of my clients said that he feels like a workhorse that manages two departments and drags the work of the company, and his colleague only knows how to “shine his face” (which was in the company’s advertising), calling himself a director (in fact, she had another position) and develop your personal brand at the expense of the employer. At the same time, the management seems to patronize this colleague. This caused envy, jealousy, a sense of injustice and resentment. He wanted to compete, prove and denounce,” recalls business coach, psychologist Svetlana Ganyushina. \- I wanted to learn how to use the company's resources in my own interests, have the same patronage of the head. In the course of the work, we found out that these feelings are connected with the childhood of the client. Both the struggle for the leader’s attention and the competition with a colleague are a process of competition with a sister for the attention of parents that was not completed in childhood. When the client stopped identifying colleagues with relatives and learned to build relationships with management that were free from jealousy, he was promoted to executive director twice in three months and paid for training at Skolkovo.

Jealousy and envy of employees pushes them to fight for the attention of the head and the resources of the company. “Not only the interests of the employer, but even their personal goals are left out. Meanwhile, all participants in the process benefit when healthy cooperation of adults arises in the team, ”comments Ganyushina.

The influence of envy and jealousy at work on the atmosphere in the company and labor productivity has long been [studied](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228079429_Negative_Emotion_in_the_Workplace_Employee_Jealousy_and_Envy) in the West - the term workplace envy is present in many studies. In recent years, their number has [increased dramatically](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-012420-055746) - competition is growing, and companies are exploring possible ways to increase productivity. Analysts often conclude that envy can be both destructive and "benign" and can then serve as a force that motivates people to work harder. However, the classic methods used by managers to try to arouse healthy envy, such as choosing an “employee of the month” or publishing performance comparison sheets, create fertile ground for the cultivation of “bad” envy, he [argues.](https://knowablemagazine.org/article/mind/2021/what-is-professional-envy) Michelle Duffy is a student of organizational behavior at the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota. And scientists from the Tübingen Institute in Germany [found out](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00628/full) that a person's motivation grows after he reads messages about his own achievements, and not at all about the achievements of colleagues. Jealousy at work can hurt productivity, creativity, teamwork, and collaboration, Duffy concludes.

{{<ads>}}

Loss rate
---------

One problem is that companies often deliberately create situations of competition between departments. “As a rule, this is typical for employers who are strongly focused on results,” Podoksenova notes. And the destruction of normal work occurs with the help of inadequately defined criteria for the effectiveness of units. “KPIs and metrics, if used incorrectly, are a terrible evil,” Yulia Danilova, PR manager of the Knopka accounting outsourcing service, is categorical. \- Firstly, personal KPI is always a narrowing of the general picture of the world to a specific task or metric, which does not always coincide with reality. And quite often we see a situation where an employee begins to unknowingly harm the company, trying to show the result. For example, to fulfill the plan, he begins to sell the product to the wrong client. Our bookkeeping outsourcing model is not suitable for everyone, such a client will be dissatisfied, quickly refuse service and write negative reviews, and reputation in the field of outsourcing is extremely important: we get a third of our customers through word of mouth, and one negative review can deprive us of dozens of customers.” That is why the company does not set personal sales plans and does not tie the salary of employees to the number of successful transactions.

The struggle between employees and entire departments also arises when the manager sets tasks vaguely, without defining areas of responsibility: “let's think about it,” “I need to go,” “come up for me by Friday.” “But you need to clearly define equal functionality for each employee: Masha will make a report, Dima will prepare statistics, Karina will digitize the results of the survey, Alena will make a presentation, Kolya will go to defend the report. Deadline on such and such date. Intermediate reconciliation in the middle of execution, advises Vedianova. “Then there are few disputes, the work is done, the employees are aware that control is being carried out.” A company can add fuel to the fire by violating confidentiality, such as when employees in the same position know about the difference in each other's salaries, says Nadezhda Zhukova, founder and CEO of talent agency Talent First.

Unhealthy competition can be generated not only by action, but also by inaction, when managers do not pay special attention to how departments communicate with each other. People may not know all the details of how other departments work, so they can easily get the impression that their department is doing the most work. “A car arrived at the production facility for unloading, but no one knows what it brought and for what projects. Production: “The office logistician did not inform in advance about the arrival of the car and what exactly he would bring. We do not have unloading planned at this time, there are two loadings going on now.” Office: “The logistician warned by phone that a car would arrive today for unloading, the production must have forgotten.” Production: “Perhaps and forgot, a lot of work. But the logistician of the office did not say what exactly they would bring. What project is this, where to store something? Logist: “I don’t have exact data on which project this came from. It was purchased by the suppliers, they know where to store it.” Purchasing Man: “Store in this project. I have no data on the exact time of arrival of the car for unloading, the logistician knows this.” Office: “The logistician told everyone everything, etc.,” Dmitry Rekunov, the operating director of the Samara Diesel Power Plant Plant, gives an example of a vicious circle.

{{<ads>}}

The task in question was solved by introducing interaction rules and using general CRM chats that will help make the work of each department transparent. Now it was not necessary to report their actions to each project participant separately, the supplier and logistician wrote all the data on the car in the general production chat. Instead of three to five calls, each participant in the process is now sent one or two messages to the general chat. “In addition, I posted videos where I shared the successes and difficulties of each branch, held video conferences, took office employees with me on a full-time trip to production. As a result, many saw the work of their colleagues from the inside, began to treat with understanding, discuss tasks constructively and without negative emotions,” Rekunov is pleased.

Clear standards should be in the company from the very beginning, not only when organizing work, but already when hiring employees. First of all, this is the selection of only those applicants whose values ​​coincide with the values ​​of the company. Another powerful tool is a clear plan for the development of a specialist. In most companies, well-thought-out employee development trajectories are completely absent - management simply does not think about it. As a result, a “culture of natural selection” arises: employees try to push each other away from all kinds of bonuses, going over each other’s heads. Meanwhile, it is not so difficult to draw up a clear plan for the development of an employee, and this is not necessarily a promotion. “Perhaps this is an increase in salaries, an increase in the number of subordinates, expensive training. Upon reaching a certain level of maturity, a person is given a promotion, a bonus.

**Author:** *Daria Salnikova*
