---
title: "How not to fail an interview: the most common behavioral questions"
description: "Behavioral questions help evaluate a job applicant's soft skills, and not properly preparing for them can cost you a coveted position. Here are some tips to help you avoid getting into trouble"
date: 2022-06-14T23:30:44+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-14T23:30:44+08:00
images:
- nt8WU93.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Chris Hondros / Getty Images'
authors:
- Nicholas Hawkins
interest: self development
channel: 
- career
tags: 
---

What are behavioral questions
-----------------------------

Behavioral questions are needed by recruiters in order to see how a candidate will get out of difficult situations at work. They often ask to use their experience as an example and focus on soft skills rather than purely professional ones. This allows the employer to understand how much past experience has prepared the employee for future tasks and difficulties. For example, for sure everyone at least once in an interview was asked about conflicts with colleagues.

Such questions can greatly spoil the impression of the candidate if he was not ready for them. People start complaining about colleagues instead of talking about their ability to resolve conflicts - and they lose their chance for a position.

How to prepare
--------------

It is important to remember that all behavioral questions are about specific situations. It is worth recalling stories from professional experience that will fit best.

Hiring specialist Amanda Augustine says you need to do this early, otherwise you'll want to avoid the unexpected question during the interview: “Recruiters won't buy it—or, worse, they'll think you're subconsciously trying to avoid conflict. None of this will get you an invitation to your next interview.”

{{<ads>}}

How to answer questions about your weaknesses
---------------------------------------------

"What is your main weakness?" is one of the most popular behavioral questions, and one that people most often stumble over. The best answer here is to name a weakness that only shows up in certain situations, for example: “When colleagues do not keep their promises, I become irritable.” The point is to complete this thought with ideas that will help to cope with this shortcoming in the future.

This is a good example of using the STAR (Situation, Task, Action, Result) technique, the easiest way to deal with behavioral issues.

**Situation:** Describe what happened.

**Task:** Describe what was required to solve the problem.

**Action:** Explain what you did to correct the situation.

**Result:** Tell about the results in as much detail as possible. It is important to mention how your actions helped the company.

How to answer questions about teamwork
--------------------------------------

Many positions require the ability to work in a team, so you need to be prepared for questions about this. A story that demonstrates teamwork skills in difficult circumstances will come in handy: resolving work conflicts, problems with project constraints, or motivating colleagues and subordinates.

{{<ads>}}

{{<info>}}
_Sample questions:_

*   _Tell me about a situation in which you had to work with someone whose character was completely different from yours._
*   _Describe a team where you had to demonstrate your leadership qualities and take the lead._
*   _Tell me about a time when you did something wrong to a co-worker._
{{</info>}}

Questions about teamwork are a good opportunity to showcase your skills, and the answer should highlight the candidate's strengths. It is sometimes difficult to look at a conflict from a positive perspective, especially if there is no sense of being wrong. However, it is critically important to focus not on the disagreement itself, but on the process of finding a solution.

**Applicants must show in their response:**

1.  Understanding that any team can have problems
2.  Ability to work with colleagues even in difficult circumstances
3.  The ability to listen
4.  Attention to the team.

How to answer customer service questions
----------------------------------------

If the position requires the ability to work with external parties (customers, buyers or business partners), you need to prepare for questions about this. The employer wants to understand whether a potential employee will be able to represent the company on the positive side and cope with service difficulties.

{{<info>}}
Sample questions: 

*   _Tell me about a situation in which you had to interact with a difficult client. What happened and how did you deal with it?_
*   _If there are many customers, it is difficult to be able to provide quality service to everyone. How do you prioritize?_
*   _Tell me about a time when you outdid yourself to make a customer happy._
*   _Give an example of a situation in which you failed to meet a client's expectations. What happened and how did you deal with it?_
{{</info>}}

{{<ads>}}

Questions of this nature are a great opportunity for the applicant to demonstrate that he will not be at a loss when interacting with "difficult" clients.

It is important to mention in the answer:

*   The context of the interaction.
*   The type of client you dealt with.
*   The resulting experience.

Not all stories have to have a positive outcome, the main thing is to let the recruiter know that the right conclusions were drawn from them.

How to answer questions about self-organization
-----------------------------------------------

Time management is important in any job, so it's worth getting ready to talk about self-discipline. Usually an employer wants to hear about the ability to cope with a large number of tasks at the same time, prioritize, organize activities and complete their duties on time.

{{<info>}}
_Sample questions:_

*   _Tell me about how you dealt with overwork at work._
*   _Tell us about a time when an unexpected problem ruined your plans. How did you get out of this situation?_
*   _Describe a time when you had to deal with several tasks at once. How did it end?_
*   _Tell us about one of your past goals. How did you go about making it happen?_
{{</info>}}

Here it is important for the applicant:

*   List the techniques that he used to organize his working day and keep everything on time.
*   Talk about your experience of interacting with people in such situations.
*   Demonstrate the ability to delegate - but only where necessary.

How to answer communication questions
-------------------------------------

Like time management, the ability to find common ground with different people is useful in any position. It is important to be able to express your thoughts and communicate respectfully. Everyone has an example of successful communication with colleagues, but here it is important to tell a story that will help demonstrate thoughtful preparation and logical thinking.

{{<info>}}
_Sample questions:_

*   _Tell us about your successful performance. Why do you think it succeeded?_
*   _Tell me about a time when you had to use email to get your ideas across to colleagues._
*   _Describe how you interact with people in different communication channels._
*   _Give an example of a situation where you managed to convince your colleagues that you were right._
{{</info>}}

These questions will help the applicant discover other skills that are useful for the job. Even if there are difficulties with communication, you should not be shy: it is better to be honest about the problem and share a story that shows that you are aware of your weaknesses and are working on them.

{{<ads>}}

How to answer questions about flexibility and adaptability
----------------------------------------------------------

Everyone has experienced trouble at work, so don't be afraid to talk about it. It is much more important to explain how you coped with difficulties. Even if the result is far from ideal, it is always possible to draw the right conclusions and show that you can learn from your mistakes.

{{<info>}}
_Sample questions:_

*   _Tell me about a stressful period at work or school. What happened and how did you deal with it?_
*   _Tell us about how you got on in your last position. What have you done to adapt?_
*   _Tell me about your failure. How did you deal with the consequences?_
*   _Describe a time when your company went through a major change. How did you adapt to them and how did it affect you?_
{{</info>}}

It's worth using questions about flexibility to mention:

*   Your ability to set goals and achieve them.
*   Healthy ways to deal with stress and increase productivity.

No one wants to hire an employee who will “burn out” every six months. We all know people who claim they never had a problem at work - and that doesn't show their flexibility. It is important for the employer to see awareness and the ability to control emotions. To prove the presence of these qualities, describe your feelings. Tell us about your experiences in difficult moments, about what helped or did not help to cope with them, how you managed to get out of these situations as a more stable and flexible person.

How to answer questions about motivation and values
---------------------------------------------------

Sometimes it can feel like the dialogue has gotten sidetracked and become too personal. In fact, it is important for a recruiter to learn more about what motivates a candidate. Therefore, it is necessary to communicate your values ​​through answers, even if the question does not directly require it.

{{<info>}}
_Sample questions:_ 

*   _Tell us about a professional achievement that you are most proud of._
*   _Tell me about a situation in which you worked under too close or, conversely, not close enough supervision. How did you deal with it?_
*   _Give an example of a time when you were able to express yourself creatively at work. What did you like and what did you find difficult?_
*   _Tell me about a time when you were dissatisfied with your task. What could be done to fix this?_
{{</info>}}

{{<ads>}}

Questions of this nature provide an opportunity to:

*   Mention special skills and abilities that have not been mentioned before.
*   Talk about your interests at work.
*   Talk about career plans.
*   Show your motivation.

To begin with, it is worth telling a story that will demonstrate your professional development. This is a simple way to let the employer know that it's not just about getting better, but about actively working on yourself.

There are many ways to adequately answer "behavioral" questions. Here are some general tips:

1.  To be honest.
2.  Explore potential questions first.
3.  Recall and briefly describe successful stories that are suitable for answers.
4.  Mark which skill you want to demonstrate in each story.
5.  Lots of practice.
6.  You can bring in friends to “rehearse” difficult interview questions and learn how to answer them.

It's important to remember that recruiters interview a lot of candidates and often hear similar responses, so platitudes should be avoided. Amanda Augustine explains: “Lack of specifics on resumes scare away potential employers. But it's even worse if you repeat them during the interview. It’s time to learn how to talk about yourself in a way that the recruiter will notice you with examples and funny stories that showcase your skills and strengths.”

###### This material was first published in Fast Company magazine or at [https://www.fastcompany.com/](https://www.fastcompany.com/) . The original article can be read [at the link](https://www.fastcompany.com/90756503/your-ultimate-guide-to-ace-the-most-common-interview-questions) . © 2021. All rights reserved. Material courtesy of Tribune Content Agency.

**Author:** *Nicholas Hawkins*