---
title: "How a helium shortage threatens SpaceX, Intel and Netflix"
description: Used as a rocket fuel, in the production of electronics and in medicine, helium has been in short supply since 2018. Companies cannot yet increase production volumes, and experts predict that the gas shortage will last another 5-10 years
date: 2022-06-12T23:00:56+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-12T23:00:56+08:00
images:
- Jm1Cb4H.jpg
caption: ''
authors:
- Nick Lukhminsky
interest: Investments
channel:
- business trends
tags: 
---

Helium is not the most common natural element on Earth: it is mined in only 14 deposits on the planet. And due to an unusual set of circumstances, right now its deficit has formed all over the world.

The gas used to fill party balloons is a critical raw material in aerospace, medicine, science and electronics. Among the largest consumers of helium: Google, Netflix, Virgin Galactic, SpaceX and NASA.

And while the market supply is declining, the demand for helium is steadily growing. By 2026, consumers will need about 5% more gas than today. At the same time, the existing infrastructure is not able to meet the growing demand: the reserves of the main gas producer, the United States, are declining, and the Amur plant of Gazprom will not reach its design capacity.

The difficult geopolitical situation is also not conducive to solving the problem: the Russian Federation, for example, in early June [limited the](https://www.forbes.ru/tekhnologii/467657-rossia-ogranicila-eksport-klucevogo-ingredienta-dla-proizvodstva-cipov) export of noble gases in response to sanctions pressure. Helium is one of these gases.

Will the shortage of gas aggravate the crisis in the semiconductor market and how will it affect private cosmonautics and medicine?

Origins of the crisis
---------------------

Despite the fact that helium is the second most abundant gas in the universe after hydrogen, its supply on Earth is small. The problem is the unique property of helium: its core is so light that the earth's gravity cannot hold it.

{{<ads>}}

Despite the constant "leakage" of helium into space, its reserves for the needs of industry, until recently, remained more than sufficient, says Christopher Ritner, a scientist at the University of Colorado. “The gas that is outside the planet is replaced by another one, a product of the decay of radioactive thorium and uranium. However, for this to happen on a scale sufficient for commercial gas production, several millennia are required. Helium is also obtained from natural gas, but in this case, the end product is even less for economic justification, ” [explains](https://news.yahoo.com/helium-gas-running-bad-news-150200232.html) Ritner.

The current shortage of helium is the fourth in a row. The previous ones, according [to](https://physicstoday.scitation.org/do/10.1063/PT.6.2.20220404a/full/) Physics Today with reference to expert Phil Kornblat, were recorded in 2006-2007, 2011-2013 and from 2018 to 2020.

For the first time, they started talking about the lack of helium in April 2006. From that point on, [says](https://www.npr.org/transcripts/15231209#:~:text=Global%20Helium%20Shortage%20Causes%20Prices%20to%20Rise%20Though%20it's%20the,to%20be%20sold%20by%202015.) Kornblat, the market was constantly in a state where supply was limited for one reason or another. The reason for the crisis in the mid-2000s was an unfortunate set of circumstances: a delay in the launch of a plant in Algeria, production in Qatar reached its design capacity later than planned, and a plant in the USA was operating at only 80% capacity due to technical problems. Supply disruptions have been coupled with rising demand, and helium prices have risen.

In 2011, production problems were also the cause of the helium shortage. Prices for natural gas [fell](https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/20/us/a-helium-shortage-leads-to-fewer-balloons-in-the-sky.html#:~:text=%E2%80%9CThe%20shortage%20is%20due%20to,operates%20the%20reserve%20in%20Amarillo.) and it became unprofitable to extract helium from it. Further production problems in Algeria and Qatar extended the gas shortage for two years. In 2018, politics intervened: production in Qatar was completely [halted](https://www.peakscientific.com/discover/news/qatar-has-ceased-helium-production/) after the closure of the border with Saudi Arabia and the severing of diplomatic relations with a number of countries. Thus, Qatar lost the ability to export most of its goods. Helium prices have risen again.

{{<ads>}}

The new crisis [comes](https://qz.com/2171115/the-world-is-facing-helium-shortage-4-0/) as the helium market experienced a brief oversupply crisis at the start of the pandemic as large businesses shut down and the entertainment industry, which needed helium to fill children's balloons, shut down for months. Gas production had to be reduced, but it was not so easy to increase it quickly when helium began to be required again in the same volumes.

The situation was aggravated by two accidents at the world's largest industries. In January of this year, a crude helium enrichment plant in Cliffside, Texas, leaked, forcing the plant to temporarily close. It gave about 14.2 million cubic meters. m of gas per year, about half the volume flowing through the 724-kilometer US natural gas pipeline used by several major helium suppliers for distribution. Approximately the same amount enters the pipeline from the Hugoton natural gas field.

Problems haunt the new large-scale helium production on the Amur in the Russian Far East. The plant was opened in September 2021, in October there was a fire, and in January there was an explosion. The business closed indefinitely. The plant could produce up to 49 million cubic meters per year. However, with the introduction of sanctions against Russia, the supply of helium from the country to world markets has been postponed indefinitely.

Another reason for the shortage was the planned renovation of two of the three factories in Qatar. Of the five major helium suppliers - Air Products and Chemicals, Air Liquide, Linde, Matheson and Messer - all but Air Products have declared force majeure and are now limiting their customers to 45-60% of contract volumes.

According [to](https://qz.com/2171115/the-world-is-facing-helium-shortage-4-0/) Quartz columnist Nicholas Riviera, the constant interruptions in the supply of helium are associated with an unsuccessful decision by the US Congress. In 1996, officials decided to privatize the National Helium Reserve and the Amarillo plant. However, gas reserves in the US were so large that they have not been completely sold so far: the final auction is scheduled for the end of this year.

Helium snapped up
-----------------

Helium reserves in the world are not too large, but the market consuming it can hardly be called large-scale. It is assumed that the volume of the world helium market [will reach](https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2022/05/09/2438631/0/en/Helium-Gas-Market-will-Register-an-Exponential-5-1-CAGR-through-2022-2032-Future-Market-Insights.html) $2.8 billion this year, and by 2032 it will grow to $4.6 billion. However, small does not mean unimportant.

{{<ads>}}

The price of liquid helium against the background of active consumption has more than doubled over the past two years - from $930 for a hundred-liter capacity to $2,000.

The most obvious consumer of gas is the entertainment industry. In the United States, due to a lack of helium, launching balloons at graduation balls, as well as maintaining the normal operation of weather services, were called into question, because weather balloons are also filled with this volatile gas, [writes](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/may/27/global-helium-shortage) The Guardian.

Large consumers of helium are aerospace companies and agencies. For example, NASA uses the gas to purge hydrogen systems and to pressurize aircraft fluid systems. Helium allows you to "cheat" the earth's gravity and speed up the supply of fuel in rocket engines. The agency also [notes](https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/nasa-awards-two-contracts-for-supply-of-gaseous-liquid-helium) that helium is required for launching rockets into space, the operation of the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) and the International Space Station. For similar purposes, helium is used in SpaceX, Boenig, Lockheed Martin and other aerospace enterprises. However, Elon Musk's company plans [to abandon](https://thehill.com/changing-america/resilience/smart-cities/542624-elon-musk-explains-why-starship-sn10-exploded-as/) the scarce gas in favor of more common materials: liquid oxygen and methane.

A helium shortage could have an unexpected impact on IT companies. Industry giants like Amazon, Google, Netflix and Apple use hard drives filled with helium to store data. As in the case of rocket fuel, the use of gas in these devices allows them to increase their volume, service life and energy efficiency. Companies can replace such devices with solid-state drives consisting of flash memory. However, helium is also required for the production of such equipment.

Inert gases like helium are needed to make semiconductors. With their help, the manufacturer can avoid unnecessary chemical reactions of silicon with the environment. For example, Intel factories will not be able to produce processors without helium, a company spokeswoman [told](https://www.energy.senate.gov/services/files/BE7C9D0C-2043-4BBD-8313-C49CB6356C0E) US officials in 2013.

Also, MRI machines that use gas for cooling can suffer from helium deficiency. It is almost impossible to find a replacement today, the Gas World edition [clarifies .](https://www.gasworld.com/helium-and-rare-gas-concerns-are-real-2022-cmc-conference-recap/2023235.article) Helium is used in cryogenics, for welding metals and for the production of fiber optics - a shortage of gas will negatively affect not only manufacturers, but also their customers.

Economic justification
----------------------

Helium is the only element of the periodic table that is mined on our planet in its pure form, and not as part of any chemical compound. However, this does not mean that there is a deposit of pure helium somewhere on earth. Helium is a noble gas that practically does not enter into chemical reactions with anything, but at the same time it mixes well with other gases. An admixture of helium can be contained in methane deposits, usually in very small quantities.

{{<ads>}}

The economic benefits of helium mining are not always obvious. As Tim Worstall of Seeking Alpha [explains](https://seekingalpha.com/article/4516637-total-helium-nice-but-helium-market), a lot depends on the concentration of helium in the feedstock. For example, in the fields developed by Total Helium, pure helium is only 0.7%. However, this is not bad: if the gas mixture contains more than 0.3% helium, its extraction is considered economically justified. This way of obtaining gas is associated with price risk: the price of helium may fall, and then the mining company will simply be left with a large amount of medium-quality natural gas on hand.

But you can find deposits with a high concentration of helium. The fact is that this gas is a decay product of uranium and thorium. The decay occurs underground, in places of natural occurrence of radioactive elements, and the resulting gas accumulates in underground voids. There it is also present in the mixture, but in more interesting concentrations. For example, in the Rukwa region of Tanzania, its concentration in raw materials reaches 10%.

To obtain pure helium, the gas mixture is cooled. As the temperature drops, the impurity gases one by one turn into a liquid, and this continues until only helium remains gaseous - it has the lowest boiling point of all terrestrial elements.

This is a monstrously energy-intensive method of production, so the helium concentration of at least 0.3 remains the threshold for economic efficiency. However, sometimes this limitation can be bypassed. Sometimes companies get helium by liquefying natural gas for its further transportation - in such conditions it is economically feasible to obtain helium even from gas, where the concentration is 0.17%. There are such facilities in Algeria, which, along with the United States and Qatar, is one of the world's largest suppliers of helium.s

**Author:** *Nick Lukhminsky*