---
title: "The special operation delayed the crisis in Latin America. But it won't be long"
description: "A number of Latin American countries have benefited from wildly rising energy and wheat prices since the start of the special military operation. The Economist explains why the region could still face a severe crisis"
date: 2022-06-15T00:27:38+08:00
lastmod: 2022-06-15T00:27:38+08:00
images:
- OLhe4g3.jpg
caption: 'Photo: Buda Mendes/Getty Images'
authors:
- Kira Galkina
interest: Investments
channel: 
- economics
tags: 
---

After the start of the Russian military operation on the territory of Ukraine, prices for wheat, oil and other commodities, which both countries export in large quantities, increased in the world. This was a blow to those countries that have limited financial resources and depend on imports. However, some world leaders saw a number of positive aspects in what was happening. “This crisis is a good opportunity for us,” Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said in March 2022. A similar statement was made in May 2022 by Argentine President Alberto Fernandez. He called his country "a source of what the world needs right now: food and energy."

The Latin American economy is indeed coping with the current crisis better than many other emerging markets. At the same time, inflation, which has risen since the outbreak of hostilities, hit the budgets of households across the region. This was a new shock, along with a number of problems that Latin American states already faced. And in the medium term, the future of some of them looks rather difficult.

Even before the start of the military operation, there was an impression that 2022 would bring many problems to developing countries. At the beginning of the year, output in many countries was still lower than before the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the debt load was much higher. Supply chain problems and rising prices have held back household consumption. At the same time, rising interest rates in rich countries "drained" capital from the poorest countries. This added to the financial problems of firms and governments that were already struggling to make ends meet.

{{<ads>}}

Latin America seemed to be one of the most troubled places. In January 2022, experts from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) expected that economic growth in the region would be lower than in all others by the end of the year. Inflation soared in Argentina and Brazil. In its latest forecast, the IMF cut its 2022 economic growth forecast by 0.6 percentage points for rich countries and a whole percentage point for emerging economies.

In the context of the current situation, Latin America has achieved quite good results over the past three months. Since February 2022, wheat and oil prices have increased by more than 20%. This is positive news for Argentina, the third largest wheat exporter in the Americas after the US and Canada. High oil and gas prices have also been a boon for hydrocarbon exporters such as Brazil and Colombia. While the outlook for most countries has deteriorated, the IMF has revised upward its 2022 economic growth forecasts for Argentina, Brazil, Peru and Colombia.

In other developing countries, soaring food and energy prices could turn an already difficult macroeconomic situation into a truly catastrophic one. For example, in Sri Lanka, the depletion of foreign exchange reserves due to the increase in the cost of imported oil forced the government to default on external debt in April 2022. In most Latin American countries, foreign purchases of high-value goods, on the contrary, ensured a constant inflow of convertible currency. This allowed people and companies to profitably purchase imported goods. Many of the region's currencies appreciated against the US dollar. This contrasts sharply with what is happening in most other developing countries.

Latin American politicians have the opportunity to protect their constituents from the problems associated with high food and energy prices - a luxury not available to many other countries. For example, the Pakistani government is cutting fuel subsidies in a desperate attempt to prevent a repeat of the Sri Lankan scenario. In Mexico, by contrast, a surge in oil export revenues helped partly offset the increased cost of domestic fuel subsidies. The governments of Colombia and Chile are maintaining subsidies, while Peru has cut consumption taxes on food and energy. On average, Latin American politicians spent about 0.3% of GDP to protect their countries from the negative consequences associated with a military operation on the territory of Ukraine.

But not everyone is so optimistic. The IMF, even after the revision of forecasts, expects that in 2022 the Latin American economy will grow more slowly than in any other part of the developing world, with the exception of Eastern Europe. Brazil will likely have to struggle to keep growth above 1% in 2022 despite high commodity prices. Expensive foodstuffs and energy carriers disperse inflation, although they help exporters. In Chile and Brazil, consumer prices are rising by more than 10%, well above central bank targets in other major Latin American economies.

{{<ads>}}

Regulators have raised interest rates in an attempt to prevent rising prices from escalating into a loss of public confidence in the government's control of inflation (a significant risk in a region with a history of devastating inflation). At the same time, higher rates simultaneously constrain the increase in investment and economic growth.

The situation could worsen if inflation in rich countries proves to be more resilient than expected. This will force central banks to raise rates more than markets are suggesting. In the 1980s, the last time the United States struggled to deal with a serious problem of inflation, the consequences for Latin America were severe: a wave of debt crises and a lost decade in economic terms. Since that time, macroeconomic policies in the Americas have become more efficient. But today the economy is more vulnerable due to the combined pressure of multiple factors.

The region simply cannot afford another crisis. In 2020, Latin America's GDP contracted more than any other part of the world. The COVID-19 pandemic has reduced investment, education has suffered, and productivity growth has slowed. This is likely to result in lower economic growth in the coming years. The IMF believes that in 2024, output in Latin America is likely to remain at a level that is about 5% lower than before the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. Recent upheavals have hit the poor the hardest.

In countries with very strong economic inequalities, this unequal distribution of spending can exacerbate political instability. Elections in Colombia and Brazil are likely to be won by candidates who are ill-equipped to deal with the issues at hand. And if governments continue to fail to help poor Latin Americans—no easy task, given global factors, and regardless of whether commodity prices are high—frustration across the region will only grow.

Author: *Kira Galkina*